Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were purchased from Clonetics Cell Discovery Systems (San Diego, CA, USA). HUVECs were routinely maintained at 37 in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2 in DMEM (Gibco, NY, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco, NY, USA). For all experiments, HUVECs were used between passage 3 and 10. Human monocytic cell line THP-1 was obtained from Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology in Shanghai and was grown in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco, NY, USA) supplemented with 2mML-glutamine and 10% fetal bovine serum.
After detachment of 90% confluent HUVECs from the flasks with 0.025% trypsin, the cells were plated in 6-well plates and stimulated with HG (20mM) or HG (20mM)+fasudil (10-5mM) for the specified times (0h, 3h, 6h, 12h, 24h, 48h). In other experiments, HUVECs were subjected to six conditions: (1) 5.5mM glucose as control; (2) 20mM glucose; (3) 33mM glucose; (4) 33mM glucose+fasudil (10-6mM); (5) 33mM glucose+fasudil (10-5mM); and (6) glucose (5.5mM)+mannitol (14.5mM). Total cellular RNA, protein and cell culture supernatants were collected for further study.
The cell adhesion assay was performed as described in a previous study . HUVECs were grown to confluence in 6-well plates and treated with HG or HG+fasudil for 12h or 24h. THP-1 monocytes labeled with BCECF-AM was added to each well in the same conditions, for 1 hour. After incubation, the medium containing monocytes was aspirated and the monolayer was gently washed with PBS three times to remove the unbound monocytes. The fluorescence was measured at an excitation and emission wavelength of 488nm and 535nm by fluorescence microscopy (Leica DMI6000, Leica, Germany). The number of adherent cells was expressed as fluorescence intensity and the adhesion data are represented in terms of the fold change compared with the control values. Three fields were captured per experimental condition. Individual treatments were performed in duplicates, and the entire set of experiments was repeated three times.
Total RNA was extracted using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, CA, USA) and 1g RNA was reverse transcribed to cDNA with PrimeScript RT reagent Kit (Takara Bio inc., Otsu, Japan). Real-time PCR assays were performed using an Applied Biosystems 7900 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, USA). The mRNA expression was determined using SYBR Premix Ex TaqTM (Takara Bio inc., Otsu, Japan). Samples were denatured at 95°C for 1min, followed by 40 PCR cycles, each cycle consisting of 95°C for 5s, 60°C for 1min. The primers employed were as follows: VCAM-1: Sense 5' CCC TTG ACC GGC TGG AGA TT 3'; Antisense 5' TGG GGG CAA CAT TGA CAT AAA GTG 3'; MCP-1: Sense 5' CCC CAG TCA CCT GCT GTT AT 3'; Antisense 5' CCA CAA TGG TCT TGA AGA TCA C 3'; GAPDH: Sense 5' ACG GAT TTG GTC GTA TTG GG 3', Antisense 5' TGA TTT TGG AGGGAT CTC GC 3'. Human VCAM-1 and MCP-1 mRNA expressions were calculated with GAPDH as an internal control.
Cells were lysed with ice-cold RIPA, centrifuged at 10,000 rpms for 5 minutes at 4°C, and the supernatants were collected. Protein concentrations in the supernatants were measured using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce Chemical Company, Rockford, USA). Cell homogenates (40g of protein) were separated on 8% SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred to PVDF, then washed with Tris-Buffered Saline, blocked with 5% skimmed milk powder except p-MYPT using 5% BSA in Tris-Buffered Saline Tween-20 for 1 hour, and incubated with the appropriate primary antibody at dilutions recommended by the supplier. Then the membrane was washed and primary antibodies were detected with secondary antibody conjugated to horseradish peroxidase for 1h at room temperature. The blots were then developed with SuperSignal enhanced chemiluminescent substrate solution (Pierce Chemical Company, Rockford, USA). Anti-VCAM-1 and anti-MCP-1 antibody used in this study were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA), anti--actin, anti-ROCKI, anti-RhoA, anti-p-MYPT and anti-MYPT antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, Massachusetts, USA).
The clinical study protocol was approved by Ethics Committees of Shanghai Tenth Hospital and Xinhua Hospital. Patients with diabetes were enrolled in the program and all study participants were given written informed consents. Afterwards participants underwent a complete medical history and physical examination and then were divided into fasudil group and control group randomly. Diabetes was diagnosed according to the WHO criteria. Exclusion criteria were current use of lipid lowering medication, inflammatory disease, deranged liver or renal function, and a major cardiovascular event within the last 3months. Patients were randomized in a single-blind manner to receive either placebo or fasudil (Chase Sun Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, TJ, China) 30mg twice a day by intravenous drip for 30 minutes every day according to the protocol indicated. At admission and two weeks later, serum samples were collected after a 10-hour overnight fast and stored at 70°C.
Serum soluble VCAM-1 (sVCAM-1) and MCP-1 concentrations were measured with commercially available ELISA kits (BD Biosciences, CA, USA) according to the manufacturers instructions. The sensitivities of the sVCAM-1 and MCP-1 ELISA were 1ng/ml and 4pg/ml, respectively. Whereas the intra- and inter-assay precision in terms of percent coefficient of variance (CV%) for sVCAM-1 and MCP-1 ELISA were<10% and<15%, respectively. Serum levels of glucose and lipid profiles, including total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, etc. were measured by colorimetric enzymatic assay systems (Roche MODULAR P-800, Swiss Confederation) as indicated before.
Continuous variables were described as meansSD; Differences among multiple groups were analyzed by one-way ANOVA. Bonferroni multiple comparison was used for comparisons among multiple treatment groups and the control group. Paired and unpaired t test was used for comparisons the effects of fasudil on diabetic patients and control group. A 2-sided probability level of0.05 was taken as significance. All analyses were done with SPSS for Windows 13.0 (SPSS Inc, Illinois, USA).