Cryopreserved Human White Preadipocytes (HWP) from subcutaneous adipose tissue and all culture media were supplied by Promocell (Heidelberg, Germany). They were cultivated as described by Promocell at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air / 5% CO2. Medium was changed every 23days. Preadipocytes were plated at a density of 5000 cells/cm and cultured to total confluency stage in 6-well plates with 3mL growth medium without antibiotics, containing 5% fetal calf serum. Growth medium was replaced and differentiation medium (including d-Biotin 8g/mL, Insulin 0.5g/mL, Dexamethasone 400pg/ml, IBMX 44g/mL, L-Thyroxine 9pg/ml, Ciglitazone 3g/mL) was added for 72h to start the differentiation process. To complete differentiation the cells were then cultured for further 12days with adipocyte nutrition medium (including fetal calf serum 3%, d-Biotin 8g/mL, Insulin 0.5g/mL, Dexamethasone 400pg/ml). During this time lipid droplets developed. Fully differentiated cells at day 15 after starting the differentiation process were preincubated with 1mL nutrition medium lacking fetal calf serum and Dexamethasone for 24h before starting the experiment. The dosages of TNF alpha and DAA used for the present analyses accorded to our established protocols within our working group, which have formerly been published, respectively in an inflammatory model with endothelial cells,. Several dosages of the highly selective and efficient stimulator TNF alpha resulted in 1ng/ml as a concentration leading to sub-maximal effects on cytokines like IL-8 or IL-6. Drotrecogin alpha (activated) was added to yield final concentrations of 50ng/ml and 5g/ml. 1h later TNF alpha was accordingly added for 1ng/ml. Cells were incubated for 6h and 24h and harvested to prepare total RNA. Supernatants of cell medium were frozen for quantification of leptin by ELISA. Treatment with DAA (50ng/ml or 5g/ml) and TNF alpha (1ng/ml) did not affect adipocyte viability, as assessed by trypan blue exclusion (90% viable cells, no difference to untreated controls).
For quantitative evaluation of DAA-dependent leptin mRNA steady-state expression in adipocyte cultures, total RNA was prepared by using the RNeasy mini column kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), including DNAse treatment. Three micrograms of RNA were reverse transcribed and converted to cDNA with oligo(dT)15 primers using AMV reverse transcriptase according to standard protocols (Roche Applied Science, Germany, AMV Cat. No. 11495062001). The cDNA was amplified by quantitative PCR (qPCR) on the ABI 7000 realtime system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, USA) using a qPCR-mix with hot start Taq DNA polymerase, SYBR-Green and enzyme system which reduces carryover DNA contamination (SYBR GreenER„¢, Invitrogen, Cat.No.11760500) in the presence of sense and antisense primers (400 nM each). The sense- and antisense-primers for leptin were supplied from SABiosciences Corp. (Cat. No. PPH00581A). GAPDH as housekeeping gene was analyzed using primers as follows: sense 5˜-TGCACCACCAACTGCTTAGC-3˜, antisense 5˜-GGCATGGACTGTGGTCATGAG-3˜. The qPCR condition consisted of 50°C for 2min (reduction of DNA carryover contamination), 95°C for 10min followed by 40cycles of 95°C for 15sec and 60°C for 1min, followed by melting-curve analysis to verify the correctness of the amplicon. Relative quantification of leptin mRNA expression was calculated as follows: The expression of leptin mRNA relative to the housekeeping gene GAPDH in samples from cells treated with DAA or untreated (Control) was calculated by the CT method, based on the threshold cycle (CT), as fold change=2(CT), where CT=CTleptinCTGAPDH and (CT)=CTDAACT Control,. Efficiencies of the amplification reactions were calculated with a typical sample analysing the slope of the regression line of a 10-fold dilution series of cDNA (log10) versus CT: Efficiency =10-1/slope. Only primer pairs that showed an amplification efficiency between 1.90  2.05 (90 105%) and a coefficient of correlation (r) between 0.90  1.0 were used for quantification. For verification of the correct length of amplification products, they were analysed on an ethidium bromide stained 2% agarose gel. All cell-culture experiments have been repeated at least twice to guarantee repeatability.
A total of 104 patients suffering from severe sepsis were prospectively enrolled at the First Department of Medicine, University Medical Centre Mannheim (UMM) (Germany) and at the Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, University Hospital Bonn (Germany) from March 2001 until October 2006. The study was carried out according to the principles of the declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the medical ethics commission II of the Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Germany. Written informed consent was obtained from all participating patients or their legal representatives.
The diagnosis of severe sepsis was based on criteria established by the American College of Chest Physicians and the Society of Critical Care Medicine Consensus Conference 1992: Patients presented with a proven infection, three or more criteria of the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS criteria) and at least 1 of the following newly developed, sepsis-induced organ failures: cardiovascular organ failure with need for vasopressors, pulmonary organ failure defined as PaO2/FiO2 <250, renal organ failure with urine output <0,5ml/kg/h, hematological organ failure with platelet count <80000/mm or an unexplained metabolic acidosis with pH <7.3 and lactate levels >1.5 times of the upper limit of normal. Sepsis-induced organ failures in these patients were strongly connected to infection and were present for less than 24h. Severity of sepsis was defined by the Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II (APACHE II) score.
Out of a total of 104 patients suffering from severe sepsis 26 patients were treated with drotrecogin alpha (activated) (DAA) and 78 patients were not treated. The decision to treat patients with DAA or without was based on site-specific treatment modalities concerning the inclusion and exclusion criteria for the administration of DAA. Twenty-six septic patients received a 96-hour infusion of DAA (XIGRIS: 24g per 1kg body weight per hour). 78 patients with severe sepsis did not receive DAA because of contraindications for drotrecogin alpha (activated) such as platelet count 30000/mm, need for therapeutic anticoagulation with heparin, increased risk of bleeding, recent gastrointestinal bleeding, or stroke within the last 3months. Additionally 45 healthy humans were included to serve as a control group.
Baseline characteristics, such as APACHE II scores, body mass index (BMI), creatinine levels, white blood cell count, platelet count, C-reactive protein (CRP), bilirubin, international normalized ratio (INR), activated partial thromboplastin time (a-PTT), antithrombin III (AT III), D-dimer as well as body temperature were determined on day 1 of severe sepsis. Total clinical follow-up lasted over 28days and defined clinical outcomes such as death or survival were documented.
Blood samples were obtained by venipuncture into serum monovettes within the first 24h after the diagnosis of severe sepsis (day 1), as well as on day 3 and 5 of severe sepsis. Within 30minutes all blood samples were centrifuged at 1000 x g at 4°C for 15minutes. Serum was separated, frozen and stored at 80°C.
Leptin measurement was performed with a solid phase two-site immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (Quantikine human leptin immunoassay, R&D Systems Inc., Minneapolis, USA).
For data with normal distribution, the Student t test was applied. Otherwise, the MannWhitney U test was used as a nonparametric test. Deviations from a Gaussian distribution were tested by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. To generate hypotheses we used multiple t-tests with Holm-Bonferroni adjustments. For cell culture experiments the most important groups were specified in advance to be compared by statistical analysis: i) Control versus TNF alpha; ii) TNF alpha versus TNF alpha+DAA 50ng/mL; iii) TNF alpha+DAA 50ng/mL versus TNF alpha+DAA 5g/mL. Pearsons correlation was used for normally distributed data. Spearmans rank correlation was used for nonparametric data. Non-continuous variables were analyzed by the use of a 2x2 table and Fishers exact test. Data are presented as meanstandard deviation (SD) or standard error of mean (SEM) as indicated. Values of P < 0.10 (two-tailed) were considered tending to be significant and P<0.05 (two-tailed) were considered statistically significant. The calculations were performed with InStat (GraphPad Software) and SPSS software (SPSS Software GmbH).