The H2228 and U118-MG cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA) and the HCC78 and BaF3 cells purchased from the DSMZ (Braunschweig, Germany). All were maintained according to the suppliers instructions, authenticated by the routine company DNA typing and were used within 6 months of receipt for this study. H3122 cells were a kind gift from Dr. John Minna from the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center (Dallas, TX). The NB-39-nu line was obtained from the National Cancer Center Research Institute (Tokyo, Japan) and TPC1 cells were a kind gift from Drs. Hiroshi Sato (Kanazawa University Cancer Research Institute, Japan) and Rebecca Schweppe (University of Colorado, Aurora, CO). No authentication of the lines obtained as gifts were carried out by the authors. All primary antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (CST, Beverly, MA) with the exception of the Hsp70 (Enzo Life Sciences, Farmingdale, NY), Claudin (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) and GAPDH and Cyclin E antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., Santa Cruz, CA). Ganetespib [3-(2,4-dihydroxy-5-isopropylphenyl)-4-(1-methyl-1H-1,2,4-triazol-5(4H)-one] was synthesized by Synta Pharmaceuticals Corp. Crizotinib, ASP3026, CH5424802 and TAE684 were all purchased from Active Biochem (Maplewood, NJ).
Cellular viability was assessed using the CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) according to the manufacturers protocol. Tumor cell lines were seeded into 96-well plates based on optimal growth rates determined empirically for each line. Twenty-four hours after plating, cells were dosed with graded concentrations of ganetespib or crizotinib for 72 h. CellTiter-Glo was added (50% v/v) to the cells, and the plates incubated for 10 min prior to luminescent detection in a SpectraMax Plus 384 microplate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Data were normalized to percent of control and IC50 values were determined using XLFit software.
Following in vitro assays, tumor cells were disrupted in lysis buffer (CST) on ice for 10 min. For the pharmacodynamic analysis, xenograft tumors (average volume of 100-200 mm3) were excised, cut in half, and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Each tumor fragment was lysed in 0.5 mL of lysis buffer using a FastPrep-24 homogenizer and Lysing Matrix A (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH). Lysates were clarified by centrifugation and equal amounts of proteins resolved by SDS-PAGE before transfer to nitrocellulose membranes (Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA). Membranes were blocked with StartingBlock T20 blocking buffer (Thermo Scientific, Cambridge MA) and immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies. Antibody-antigen complexes were visualized using an Odyssey system (LI-COR, Lincoln, NE).
For combinatorial analysis, H3122 cells (7.5  103) were seeded in 96-well plates and incubated at 37oC, 5% CO2 for 24 h. Drug combinations were applied at a non-constant ratio, using three 1.5 fold serial dilutions above and below the IC50 values for each compound. Cell viability was assessed 72 h after drug addition by Cell Titer-Glo and normalized to vehicle controls. For each combination study, the level of growth inhibition (fraction affected) is plotted relative to vehicle control. Data are presented as one relevant combination point and the corresponding single agent data for each cell line tested.
Female CD-1 nude and CB.17 (SCID) mice (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) at 7-12 weeks of age were maintained in a pathogen-free environment and all in vivo procedures were approved by the Synta Pharmaceuticals Corp. Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. H3122 NSCLC cells (7.5  106) were subcutaneously implanted into the animals. Mice bearing established tumors (~200 mm3) were randomized into treatment groups of 7 and dosed with vehicle, ganetespib (i.v.) or crizotinib (p.o.), both formulated in DRD (10% DMSO, 18% Cremophor RH 40, 3.6% dextrose), using the schedules indicated. Tumor volumes (V) were calculated by caliper measurements of the width (W), length (L) and thickness (T) of each tumor using the formula: V=0.5236(LWT). Tumor growth inhibition was determined as described previously. Statistical analyses were performed using a Kruskal-Wallace one-way ANOVA on ranks followed by the Tukey test. For the survival analysis, H3122-implanted SCID mice were randomized into groups of 7 after 12 days, and then dosed with vehicle, 50 mg/kg ganetespib 1X/week, or 50 mg/kg crizotinib 5X/week. Animal survival assessed for 75 days with the endpoints defined as animal death, cavitating tumors or tumors > 1.5 cm. Overall survival is presented using the Kaplan-Meier method.
BaF3 cells engineered to stably express NPM-ALK were used to select for crizotinib-resistance and screening for inhibitor-resistant colonies was performed as previously described. No chemical mutagenesis (e.g. with ENU) was used to accelerate the emergence of resistant clones. Clonally-derived, crizotinib-resistant NPM-ALK/BaF3 lines were isolated by limiting dilution, and sequence analysis of the ALK kinase domain was performed to identify the resistance mutations. Cytotoxic IC50 determinations were performed using an XTT Cell Viability Assay Kit (CST) after a 72 h incubation of crizotinib with NPM-ALK/BaF3 clones bearing each of the identified inhibitor-resistant mutations. Further, each putative mutation was confirmed to confer crizotinib resistance by engineering into NPM-ALK cDNA, generating clonal NPM-ALK/BaF3 cell lines to express the mutation, and determining IC50 cytotoxicity values for crizotinib in the clonal lines. Ganetespib cytotoxicity IC50 values for crizotinib-resistant NPM-ALK/BaF3 cells were determined following incubation with graded concentrations of the compound for 72 h. Immunoblotting to assess the degradation of NPM-ALK in response to ganetespib exposure was performed using an ALK 11 rabbit polyclonal anti-serum at a dilution of 1:2000.
This study includes preliminary data of clinical response in one 24 year old male patient enrolled into a Phase II multicenter trial of ganetespib monotherapy in advanced NSCLC (NCT01031225). The patient harbored an EML4 exon 6-ALK translocation and had failed previous crizotinib therapy  subsequent direct ALK exon sequencing identified the presence of a secondary G1269A mutation. The trial was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the ethics committee at each participating institution; patients were required to provide written informed consent prior to enrollment. The study was sponsored by Synta Pharmaceuticals Corp.