Gram-positive Enterococcus faecalis (ATCC29212) was cultured in brainheart infusion medium. Bacteria were harvested and washed twice with ice-cold PBS (Wako Chemicals, Osaka, Japan). Bacterial suspensions were heated at 80° for 30 min, washed, resuspended in PBS and stored at  80°. Complete killing was confirmed by 24 hr incubation at 37° on solid growth medium.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated from heparinized peripheral blood samples by density gradient centrifugation using Lymphoprep (Nycomed Pharma, Oslo, Norway). Cells were aspirated from the gradient interface, washed in PBS, and resuspended at 1  106 cells/ml in RPMI-1640 medium (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO) containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (BioSource, Camarillo, CA), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 mg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen, La Jolla, CA). Monocytes were purified using a magnetic cell separation system (MACS; Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, AL) with anti-human CD14 microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec). Monocytes were seeded in dishes at a density of 1  106 cells/2 ml culture medium. Based on a review of monocyte differentiation, some cultures contained 50 ng/ml M-CSF (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) for M-CSF-differentiated macrophages (M-MÏ•s), 50 ng/ml M-CSF and 100 ng/ml IFN- (R&D) for M-MÏ•s, 50 ng/ml granulocytemacrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) (R&D) for GM-CSF-differentiated macrophages (GM-MÏ•s) or 20 ng/ml GM-CSF and 20 ng/ml IL-4 (R&D) for DCs. After 1, 3 and 6 days, cells were collected. We defined stimulated monocytes for 6 days as completely differentiated. Some samples were used for real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), immunofluorescence and Western blot analyses.
Peripheral blood samples were collected from healthy donors after obtaining written informed consent. All experiments were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Keio University School of Medicine.
Total RNA was isolated from monocytes using an RNeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen, Washington DC) and reverse transcribed using a Primescript RT Reagent Kit (Takara Bio Inc., Otsu, Japan) according to the manufacturer's instructions. RT-qPCR was performed using a TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) with gene-specific primers for TGR5 (Hs01937849_s1) and -actin (Hs99999903_m1) as an internal control. The PCR amplifications were performed using a DNA Engine Opticon 2 system or CFX96 Real-Time System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA), and data were analysed with Opticon Monitor software (MJ Research, Waltham, MA).
Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and blocked in Protein Block serum-free Ready-To-Use (Dako, Glostup, Denmark) for 1 hr at room temperature. Then, cells were incubated with a rabbit anti-TGR5 antibody (Abcam, Cambridge, MA) for 2 hr, followed by an Alexa Fluor 568-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) for 1 hr, while protected from light. Nuclei were counterstained with Hoechst 33342 trihydrochloride, trihydrate (Invitrogen). The fluorescence images obtained were analysed by Lumina Vision software (Mitani, Tokyo, Japan).
Differentiated monocytes described above were seeded in 96-well culture dishes at a density of 2  105 cells/200 l culture medium. Then, cells were stimulated with the following: heat-killed E. faecalis (multiplicity of infection = 100), lipopolysaccharide (LPS; Sigma), BAs; chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA; Sigma), deoxycholic acid (DCA; Sigma), lithocholic acid (LCA; Sigma), cholic acid (CA; Nacalai Tesque, Kyoto, Japan) or ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA; Tokyo Chemical Industry, Tokyo, Japan), a 3-(2-chlorophenyl)-N-(4-chlorophenyl)-N,5-dimethylisoxazole-4-carboxamide as a TGR5 agonist (Bio Vision, Mountain View, CA) which was derived by Evans et al. (Fig. 1), a p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitor (Merck Millipore, Tokyo, Japan), a toll-like receptor 4 inhibitor (Imgenex, San Diego, CA) or 8-bromoadenosine 3, 5-cyclic monophosphate as a cAMP reagent (Sigma). After 1 day of stimulation, supernatants were collected for cytokine assays, and the remaining cells were used for viability assays.
For labelling cell surface markers, monoclonal antibodies against CD14, CD33, CD205, CD206, CD209, CD80, CD86, CD1a, CD40, PD-L1, PD-L2, CD16, CD32 and CD64 were purchased from BD Pharmingen (San Jose, CA). Monoclonal antibody against TGR5 was purchased from R&D. The fluorescence intensity of labelled cell surface markers was assessed using an FACS Calibur flow cytometer (BD), and the data were analysed using CellQuest (BD) or FlowJo (TreeStar Inc., Ashland, OR) software. Dead cells were excluded from analyses by propidium iodide staining.
Production levels of TNF- were assessed using a Human Inflammation Cytometric Bead Array Kit (BD) with the FACS Calibur, according to the manufacturer's instructions.
M-MÏ•s (1  105 cells) were treated with the TGR5 agonist (10 m) for 5 min in the presence of 1 mm 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (Sigma). The amount of cAMP was determined with a cAMP-Screen System (Applied Biosystems).
M-MÏ•s stimulated by 10 ng/ml LPS and 10 m TGR5 agonist were used for intracellular signalling protein detection. Cells (1  105 cells/well of a 96-well plate) were washed with ice-cold PBS containing 0·1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), and then lysed in 15 l RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) containing 0·5% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) and 1 mM Na3VO4. After centrifugation, supernatants mixed with lithium dodecyl sulphate sample buffer and reducing agents (Invitrogen) were electrophoresed on a Mini PROTEAN TGX gel (Bio-Rad). Separated proteins were transferred by an iBlot Dry Blotting System (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The membrane was immersed in Starting Block T20 (TBS) Blocking Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 1 hr. After blocking, primary antibodies were added to the membranes, followed by incubation at 4° overnight. After incubation with a horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA), blots were visualized using an Amersham ECL Prime western Blotting Detection Reagent (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK) and analysed using an ImageQuant LAS 4000 mini (GE Healthcare). The antibodies used were anti-phospho-c-Fos, anti-c-Fos and anti--actin (all Cell Signaling). Immunoblotted membranes were repeatedly used after treatment with a Ten-min Western Blot Re-Probe Kit (Jacksun Easy Biotech, Bronx, NY).
Normal intestinal mucosa was obtained from macroscopically and microscopically unaffected areas in patients with colon cancer as non-IBD samples. Intestinal IBD mucosa was obtained from surgically resected specimens taken from patients with CD and diagnosed based on clinical, radiographic, endoscopic and histological findings, according to established criteria. All experiments were approved by the Institutional Review Board of Keio University School of Medicine and Yokohama Municipal Citizen's Hospital, Inagi Municipal Hospital, and written informed consent was obtained from all patients.
Lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMCs) were isolated from intestinal specimens using a technique described elsewhere, with some modification. Briefly, dissected mucosa was incubated in calcium and magnesium-free Hanks' balanced salt solution (HBSS) (Sigma) containing 2·5% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum and 1 mm dithiothreitol (Sigma) to remove mucus. The mucosa was then incubated twice in HBSS containing 1 mm EDTA (Sigma) for 45 min at 37°. Tissues were collected and incubated in HBSS containing 1 mg/ml collagenase type 3 and 0·1 mg/ml DNase I (Worthington Biochemical, Lakewood, CO) for 60 min at 37°. Cells were pelleted and resuspended in a 40% Percoll solution (GE Healthcare), and then layered onto 60% Percoll before centrifugation for 20 min at room temperature. Viable LPMCs were recovered from the 4060% layer interface. CD14+, CD3+, CD56+ and CD14 CD3 CD56 subsets of LPMCs were purified using MACS. Cells were used for RT-qPCR analysis of TGR5 and the cytokine production assay.
PrestoBlue Cell Viability Reagent (Invitrogen), diluted at 1 : 10 with medium, was added to differentiated monocytes (2  105 cells/100 l diluted solution) in a 96-well plate. Samples were then incubated for 30 min at 37°. PrestoBlue is reduced from blue resazurin to red redorufin in the presence of viable cells. Fluorescence (excitation, 570 nm; emission, 600 nm) was measured with a Benchmark plus (Bio-Rad).
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software version 4.0 (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA). KruskalWallis one-way analysis of variance and the Bonferroni post-hoc test were used for examining statistical differences among more than three groups, and the Student's t-test was used for two groups. A value of P < 0·05 was considered statistically significant.