The design of the Gene Expression in Obesity and Insulin Resistance (GENOBIN) study has been reported earlier. Altogether, 46 overweight or obese (BMI 2840 kg/m2) subjects 4070 years of age were randomly assigned to one of two groups: a weight-reduction group (n = 28) or a weight-maintenance control group (n = 18). After an overnight fast, AT samples were taken by needle biopsy from subcutaneous AT before and after the intervention (8 months) under local anesthesia (lidocaine 10 mg/mL without adrenaline).
The GENOBIN study was performed in accordance with the standards of the Helsinki Declaration, and the ethics committee of the District Hospital Region of Northern Savo approved the study plans. All participants gave a written informed consent.
Human preadipocyte cell strain SGBS is characterized by a high capacity for adipogenic differentiation. The cells were cultured as described previously.
RNA interference was used for knocking down the expression of the CPPED1 gene in mature adipocytes. ON-TARGETplus SMARTpool siRNA for CPPED1 was purchased from Dharmacon (Thermo Scientific, Lafayette, CO). There are four target siRNA sequences included in the pool: AGAAAAUUGUUCACCGAUA, UAAAUGCACUAAUGCGAAA, CGGAGGACCUGAAGCGAGU, and CCUUUAAAAUGGAGCGAAU. The negative control for the siRNA (scrambled) used in the experiment was Allstars negative control siRNA (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). The siRNA was transfected into the cell by using HiPerFect transfection reagent (Qiagen) according to the instructions.
In brief, the SGBS cells were cultured in 12-well plates and induced into mature adipocytes. On day 14 of differentiation, the medium was replaced with Dulbeccos modified Eagles medium/Hams F12 nutrient mixture (1:1) supplemented with 33 µmol/L biotin, 17 µmol/L pantothenate, 10 µg/mL transferrin, and 20 nmol/L insulin. The cells were transfected with 50 nmol/L siRNA and incubated for the indicated time points. Knockdown of CPPED1 expression was confirmed by reverse-transcriptase quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) and Western blot. The effect of CPPED1 knockdown on high-molecular-weight (HMW) adiponectin secretion into the conditioned medium was measured with a commercial ELISA kit purchased from Millipore (St. Charles, MO) according to the manufacturers protocol.
The SGBS cells were cultured in 12-well plates and induced into mature adipocytes. On day 17 of differentiation, the cells were washed twice with PBS and preincubated with KRH buffer (20 mmol/L HEPES [pH 7.4], 118 mmol/L NaCl, 4.8 mmol/L KCl, 2.5 mmol/L CaCl2, 1.2 mmol/L MgSO4) for 2 h at +37°C. After preincubation, the cells were incubated in the presence of 100 nmol/L wortmannin for 30 min (when indicated) and followed by incubation with 1 µmol/L insulin for 20 min. Next, 0.5 µCi/mL labeled 2-deoxy-D-[3H] glucose (Amersham TRK672; GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, U.K.) and 0.2 mmol/L d-glucose were added for an additional 15 min at +37°C. The reaction was terminated by placing the cells onto the ice and washing three times with ice-cold PBS.
The cells were solubilized with 200 µL of 0.2 N NaOH per well and incubated 1.5 h at room temperature with constant shaking. The cell lysate (100 µL) was transferred to a 2.0-mL Eppendorf tube, and scintillation liquid was added for radioactivity counting. Glucose uptake was normalized to protein content as measured from the remaining cell lysate using the Bio-Rad protein assay (DC Protein Assay; Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Protein concentrations were measured according to the manufacturers instructions (DC Protein Assay) using Wallac 1420.
Total RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis of AT samples have been described previously. For cultured SGBS cells, the RNeasy Mini Kit was used for the total RNA extraction (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad) according to instructions provided by the manufacturer.
RT-qPCR with TaqMan chemistry (Applied Biosystems) using an ABI Prism 7500 analyzer (Applied Biosystems) was used. The analysis for the relative quantity of a specific gene before and after the intervention in AT of the GENOBIN was performed as described previously. The expression of target genes was normalized to cyclophilin A1 (PPIA) expression for AT samples and SGBS cells. Expression of the target genes in cultured SGBS cells was normalized to the endogenous control using the formula 2ddCt.
For Western blot, cells were rinsed twice with PBS and then lysed in RIPA Lysis and Extraction Buffer (Pierce, Rockford, IL) freshly supplemented with 1 mmol/L EDTA, 1 mmol/L PMSF, 1 mmol/L Na3VO4, 1 mmol/L NaF, and proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany), followed by centrifugation (13,000 rpm, 15 min, +4°C) and removal of the soluble fraction. The protein concentration was determined using the Bio-Rad protein assay (DC Protein Assay). Equal amounts of protein were separated using SDS-PAGE and transferred to the polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane (GE Healthcare).
Rabbit anti-human CPPED1 and adiponectin (ADIPOQ) were used as primary antibodies (Sigma-Aldrich). The primary antibodies were detected with goat anti-rabbit peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (Pierce). Signals were detected using Amersham Advance Western Blotting Detection Kit (GE Healthcare) and ImageQuant Capture-RT ECL for Windows version 1.0.1 (GE Healthcare). Densitometric analysis was performed by ImageJ version 1.45s (ImageJ; National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD). A rabbit anti-human glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH; Abcam) was used for normalization.
The gene expression data of GENOBIN was analyzed using the SPSS software for Windows version 14.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL), and data are provided as mean  SD, unless otherwise indicated. Paired-samples Student t test was used for comparing the baseline and end point measurements within the study group. A value of P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
All results of the SGBS cell culture studies were analyzed using the GraphPad Prism5 software for Windows version 5.03 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA), and results are expressed as mean  SEM. Statistical significance was determined with independent-samples Student t test or one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni multiple comparison test (indicated in figures). A value of P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.