After this study was approved by the ethics committees of Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital (ID: #220106), human cardiac tissue samples from RAA were surgically excised from 7 patients (6075 years old) during cardiac surgery. All patients provided written informed consent. A cell population containing CSCs was acquired according to the current protocol for ALCADIA . In brief, the tissue fragments were cut into 55-mm pieces and incubated with 0.2% collagenase type II and 0.1% DNase I (Worthington Biochemicals) at 37°C for 30 min. The cells were cultivated in a basic culture medium of Dulbeccos modified Eagle medium (DMEM)/F12 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 40 ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). The cells were seeded in 60-mm dishes coated with collagen type I. The cultured cells were passaged twice, harvested, and frozen until used in this experiment. P2 cell population was utilized as the starting material for this comparison experiment.
After thawing, the cells derived from the human atrium were seeded at 1105 cells per 100-mm culture dish and cultivated for 57 days. The cells were split at 1:10 at 80%90% confluence. The basic culture medium was replaced every 3 or 4 days. For automated culture, we used the same lot of CSCs. After seeding, the culture dishes were placed in the AutoCulture chamber and transferred into the internal CO2 incubator by the robot arm (Figure  1A, Additional file 4). For media replacement, the robot arm retrieved the culture dishes from the incubator and set them on a rotating table. The dish covers were removed by the robot arm, a specified amount of medium was discarded, fresh medium was supplied by a new pipette, the covers were returned, and the culture dishes was transferred back to the CO2 incubator. For passage, the old medium was removed and DPBS was pipetted onto the dishes under gentle shaking. After washing in DPBS, AutoCulture supplied trypsin, oscillated the culture dishes, and returned them to the CO2 incubator for a 5-min incubation. Following this, the robot arm moved the culture dishes onto the rotation table, added a prespecified volume of the basic culture media, and transferred the cell suspension from each dish to a separate 50-ml centrifuge tube. The cell suspension was centrifuged at 200g for 5 min at room temperature, and the supernatant was discarded. Fresh basic culture medium was supplied to the cell pellet, which was then resuspended. The washed cell suspension was subcultured at approximately 1:10 onto new culture dishes and returned to the CO2 incubator.
Total RNA was extracted from cell populations containing CSCs, from human iPSCs, and raw human heart tissue samples using the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (QIAGEN) as positive/negative control. Total RNA from human iPSCs and the human heart (Clontech Laboratories) was used as the positive control for each primer. Total RNA (500 ng per reaction) was converted to cDNA using the Transcriptor High Fidelity cDNA Synthesis Kit (Roche Applied Science) according to the manufacturers protocol. Primers for the cardiac-specific transcription factors NKX2.5 and GATA4; the stem cell markers NANOG, OCT3/4, SOX2, and REX1; and the housekeeping gene GAPDH were obtained from PrimerBank (Additional file 5).
The cells (1106 per reaction) were stained in autoMACS Running Buffer (Miltenyi Biotec.) with fluorescence-conjugated primary antibodies for 30 min at 4°C. The cells were then analyzed on the Attune Acoustic Focusing Cytometer (Applied Biosystem), and the data were analyzed using FlowJo 8.8.7 software (TOMY Digital Biology). Antibodies used for phenotyping included anti-human CD29-PE, CD90-PE, CD105-FITC, STRO-1-FITC, CD45-PE, and MHC class II-PE. Isotype controls were FITC-conjugated mouse IgG1, PE-conjugated mouse IgG1, and FITC-conjugated mouse IgM.
Proteins were extracted from each cell population in hydrophobic and hydrophilic fractions using the CelLytic MEM Protein Extraction Kit (Sigma-Aldrich), as described previously . Lectin microarray analysis was performed as described previously, with only minor modifications . The glycoprotein (200 ng) was labeled with Cy3 mono-reactive dye (GE Healthcare) in DPBS containing 0.5% Triton X-100 (PBSTx) at room temperature for 1 h. The Cy3-labeled glycoprotein solution (60 l) was applied to the LecChip (GP Bioscience), which has triplicate spots specific for 45 lectins on each glass slide. An evanescent-field fluorescence scanner (GlycoStationTM Reader) was used to analyze the LecChip. All data were analyzed with GlycoStationTM Tools Signal Capture 1.0 and GlycoStationTM Tools Pro 1.0 software (GP Bioscience). To expand the dynamic range, the data were subjected to a gain-merging procedure, and the merged data were then normalized with max-normalization, as described previously .
Genomic DNA from the heart tissue and cultured cells was isolated using the DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (QIAGEN). Labeled test and reference DNAs were combined, denatured, preannealed with Cot-1 DNA (Invitrogen) and blocking agent, and then hybridized to the arrays (SurePrint G3 Human CGH Microarray 2x400K, Agilent Technologies). After hybridization and washing, the arrays were scanned at 3-m resolution using an Agilent G2505C scanner. Images were analyzed with Feature Extraction software 10.7.3.1 (Agilent Technologies) using the CGH 107 Sep09 protocol for background subtraction and normalization.
Gene expression analysis was performed using the Agilent Whole Human Genome Microarray chip G4112F (Agilent Technologies), which contains >41,000 probes. Raw data were normalized and analyzed by GeneSpring GX11 software (Silicon Genetics). Pairwise scatter plot analysis of the global gene expression profiles of both manually cultured cells and autocultured cells was performed on day 7 after thawing. The number of differentially expressed genes is indicated over each scatter plot. The NIA Array  web tool was used for pairwise scatter plot analysis. Gene expression microarray data have been submitted under accession number GSE 44032. Analysis of microarray experiments was conducted using the Aberration Detection Method-2 statistical algorithm (Agilent Technologies) on the basis of the combined log2 ratios at a threshold of 6.0. The data were centralized, and calls with average log2 ratios <0.3219 were filtered to exclude false positives.