Breast tumor samples and adjacent normal tissues were obtained at biopsy from 80 breast-cancer patients (Table S1) in the breast tumor center, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, from January 2008 to December 2011. All the patients recruited into the present study did not receive radiotherapy or chemotherapy or any other treatment before and after operation. Surgical specimens of the tumor resection were collected, and lumps of tumors as well as adjacent normal tissues, which were at least 2 cm distal to tumor margins, were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for miRNA assay. In addition, the remaining tissues were embedded for studies of histology, immunohistochemistry, and in situ hybridization. All patients signed informed consent approving the use of their tissues for research purposes and the study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital (Ethical number: 2010-09).
The following is the sources of cells and reagents used. Human embryonic kidney-293 cells (HEK 293 cells), the breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231, MCF-7), and human mammary epithelial cell line (MCF-10A) were obtained from the ATCC and maintained in RPMI 1640 or Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% antibiotics (Invitrogen, USA). Transfection of the cells with miRNA mimics or miRNA inhibitors (Genepharma, China) was performed using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, USA) as previously described.
Total RNA was extracted from cells or tissues using Ezol according to the manufacturer's instructions (GenePharma, China). Real-time PCR was carried out using FTC3000 (Funglyn, Canada). The primers used for miR-150, U6 snRNA, P2X7 and GAPDH are as follows: miR-150 forward, 5-CAGTATTCTCTCCCAACCCTTGTA-3; miR-150 reverse, 5-AATGGATGATCTCGTCAGTCTGTT-3, U6 snRNA forward, 5-ATTGGAACGATACAGAGAAGATT-3; U6 snRNA reverse, 5-GGAACGCTTCACGAATTTG-3, P2X7 forward, 5-CATGAGAAGTATGACAACAGCCT-3; P2X7 reverse, 5-AGTCCTTCCACGATACCAAAGT-3, GAPDH forward, 5-GCTGCTTAGAAAGGAGGCG-3; GAPDH, 5-GGGAGTTGAGATGGGAGGC-3. PCR amplification consisted of an initial denaturation step at 95°C for 3 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 s, 62°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 30 s. All primers and qRT-PCR quantitation Kit were purchased from GenePharma (GenePharma, China). Standard curves were generated, and the relative amount of miR-150 or P2X7 was normalized to the amount of U6 snRNA or GAPDH, respectively.
miR-150 expression was examined by in situ hybridization on the formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded sections of breast cancers. This assay was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol (Exiqon, Denmark). Briefly, after demasking, microRNA was hybridized to 5-DIG-labeled LNA probes. Then the digoxigenins were recognized by a specific anti-DIG antibody (Abcam, USA) directly conjugated to alkaline phosphatase. The nuclei were counterstained with fast red. A total of 1000 tumor cells were counted randomly in each section.
FISH hybridization was performed in breast cancer cells under the following conditions: Cells were prehybridized at 45°C for 2 h and hybridized at 45°C for 16 h. After the hybridization, cells were washed with 2 x SSC at 45°C. Then, probe detection was performed using TRITC-anti-DIG antibody (Roche, Switzerland) and DAPI was used as counterstain. The coverslips were evaluated using a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal microscope (Zeiss, Germany).
Cells were stained for immunofluorescence on coverslips. After fixation and permeabilization, the cells were incubated with primary antibody against P2X7 (Santa Cruz, USA) and then incubated with rhodamine-conjugated secondary antibody (Invitrogen, USA). The coverslips were counterstained with DAPI and imaged under a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal microscope (Zeiss, Germany).
P2X7 receptor expression was examined by immunohistochemistry on paraffin-embedded tissue sections. Briefly, rabbit anti-P2X7 polyclonal antibody (Santa Cruz, USA) was used as the primary antibody for overnight incubation at 4°C. The sections were then treated with secondary antibody, followed by further incubation with streptavidin-horseradish peroxidase complex. Diaminobenzidine (Dako, USA) was used as a chromogen and the nuclei were counterstained with hematoxylin. The percentage of positively staining tumor cells was calculated per field of view, with at least 20 view fields per section evaluated at 400 magnification.
To evaluate the function of miR-150, the 3UTR of P2X7 with a miR-150 targeting sequence was cloned into a pGL3-promoter luciferase reporter vector (Ibsbio, China). Luciferase assays were carried out in HEK 293 cells. To correct transfection efficiency, a luciferase reporter vector without the miR-150 target was transfected in parallel. Luciferase activities were assayed using a luciferase assay kit (Promega, USA), and target effect was expressed as relative luciferase activity of the reporter vector with target sequence over the one without target sequence. Each assay was performed three times.
The effect of miR-150 on proliferation of breast cancer cells was evaluated by the MTT assay. MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells were plated in 96-well culture plates (3103 per well). After 24h incubation, the cells were treated with miR-150 inhibitors, anti-miR-NC (miR-NC inhibitor), miR-150 mimics, miR-150-NC mimics and mock for 48 hours. MTT (0.5 mg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was then added to each well (200 µl/well). After 4 hours of additional incubation, MTT solution was discarded and 200 µl of DMSO (Sigma, USA) was added and the plates shaken gently. The absorbance was measured on an ELISA reader at a wavelength of 570 nm. For clonogenicity assays, cells were cultured and subsequently transfected with microRNAs mimics (miR-150 or miR-NC). Following 48 hours transfection, cells were trypsinized and plated in 6-well plates at a density of 1103 cells/well in regular media for colony formation. After two weeks, colonies were fixed with methanol, stained with crystal violet, photographed and counted. Each experiment was performed in triplicate.
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferasemediated dUTP labeling (TUNEL) assay was done using an in situ apoptosis detection kit (R&D Systems, USA). Briefly, after digesting with Protease K, TdT reaction mix was applied to the cells for incubation at 37°C for 60 min, followed by incubation with streptavidin horseradish peroxidase for 10 min. The final reaction of the product was visualized by 3,3-diaminobenzidine. Approximately 1,000 tumor cells were counted in each section, and apoptotic index was expressed as the percentage of TUNEL-positive tumor cells.
Protein extracts were resolved through 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (BioRad, USA), probed with antibody against P2X7 receptor (Santa Cruz, USA), and GAPDH from Santa Cruz (Santa Cruz, USA), and then with peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (ProteinTech Group, USA), followed visualization using chemiluminescence (GE, USA).
All animal procedures were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Sun Yat-Sen University (Protocol number: 2010-09) and conformed to the legal mandates and national guidelines for the care and maintenance of laboratory animals. MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells (1106/mouse) (untransduced or transduced with miRNA-expressing vector LV4-miR-150 inhibitor-GFP-Luc or LV4-NC-GFP-Luc were injected subcutaneously into the mammary fat pad of 5-week-old BALB/c-nu mice. After tumors were detected, tumor size was measured and calculated as volume (mm3)Š=Šlengthwidth2 0.5 for up to 5 weeks. Then tumor xenografts were harvested, weighed, and processed for histology. Cryosections (4 µm) were used for TUNEL assays as well as immunohistochemistry for P2X7 receptor (Santa Cruz, USA). The miR-150 level of tumors was also determined by using qRT-PCR. Animal experiments were performed in accordance with the institutional guidelines of the university committee on the use and care of animals.
All statistical analyses were carried out using SPSS for Windows version 16.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). The differences between the means were tested by an independent sample t-test, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) or Bonferroni's multiple comparison t-test. The chi-squared test was used to compare the the clinicopathological status and the expression of miR-150 or P2X7. Each experiment was performed at least three times, independently. Measurement data were presented as mean  standard deviation (SD). P<0.05 was considered statistically significant. Corrected P-valueŠ=Š p-value * n<0.05