Primary satellite cells (myoblasts) were isolated as previously described.. Briefly, myoblasts were cultured in F-10 medium supplemented with 20% FBS and basic FGF. For differentiation into myotubes, cells were changed to DMEM supplemented with 5% horse serum. At day 2 of differentiation, myocytes were transduced with an adenovirus expressing either PGC-1 or GFP as previously described. At 24 hr post transduction cells were washed with PBS and freestyle media (GIBCO/Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY). Freestyle media was added to GFP and PGC-1 expressing myocytes, and cells were incubated for 24 hours. Media was collected and cleared with centrifugation (1000g, 4 °C for 5 min  3). The supernatant was then snap frozen in aliquots.
Primary white adipose stromal vascular cells were fractionated as previously described. Stromal vascular cells were then cultured and induced to differentiate into adipocytes also according to published methods. Stromal vascular cells were cultured in DMEM/F12 containing 10% FBS. Adipocyte differentiation was induced in preadipocytes cultured by treating confluent cells for 48 hrs in medium containing 10% FBS, isobutylmethylxanthine 0.5 mM, indomethacin 125 nM, dexamethasone 1 M, insulin 850 nM, T3 1 nM, and rosiglitazone 1 M (Cayman Chemical). 2 days after the induction of differentiation, media was removed and replaced with maintenance media containing 10% FBS, insulin 850 nM, T3 1 nM, and rosiglitazone 1 M. During the 6 days, cells were cultured with either saline (control), GABA 3 M, cytosine 1 M, 2-deoxycytidine 15 M and BAIBA 0.3, 1, 3 and 5 M. All chemicals for cell culture were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich unless noted.
Human induced pluripotent stem cells were maintained and differentiated into mature brown and white adipocytes as previously described. Briefly, human induced pluripotent stem cells were cultured feeder free on Geltrex (Invitrogen) in the chemically defined medium mTESR1 (Stem Cell Technologies). Human induced pluripotent stem cells were disaggregated with dispase into small clumps containing 5-10 cells and transferred to low-adhesion plastic 6-well plates (Costar Ultra Low Attachment; Corning Life Sciences) in growth medium containing DMEM, 15% FBS, and 1% Glutamax. After 7 days in suspension culture, embryoid bodies were collected and re-plated on gelatin-coated 6-well plates in medium containing DMEM, 10% FBS, and 1% Glutamax. After cells reached confluency (approximately 5 days), they were trypsinized (0.25% trypsin) and re-plated on cell culture dishes containing mesenchymal progenitor cell growth medium containing DMEM, 15% FBS, 1% Glutamax, and bFGF 2.5 ng/ml (Aldevron). Cells were passaged with a 1:3 split ratio and differentiated after at least 3 passages and prior to passage 10. Adipogenic differentiation was carried out for 21 days using an adipogenic differentiation medium containing DMEM, 7.5% knockout serum replacement (KOSR; Invitrogen), 7.5% human plasmanate, 0.5% nonessential amino acids, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, dexamethasone 0.1 M, insulin 10 g/ml, and rosiglitazone 0.5 M. Differentiation was carried out either in the absence of BAIBA, in the case of controls, and with two concentrations of BAIBA at 1 M or 10 M in the differentiation media. Adipogenic differentiation medium was supplemented for 16 days with doxycyline 700 ng/ml, and afterwards cells were maintained in culture in the absence of doxycycline until day 21.
Lentivirus production and transduction of the cells was performed as previously described. A third-generation, Tat-free packaging system was used to produce recombinant lentivirus. The vectorseither Lenti-rtTA plasmid or Lenti-PPARG2 plasmidtogether with the two packaging plasmidspMDL, pREVand the plasmid coding for VSV-G envelope were transfected into HEK 293T cells using calcium chlorate as previously described. Cells were transduced with lentiviral supernatant 24 hr after passaging at about 40% confluency.
Adipocytes were serum-starved in 2% BSA DMEM overnight. Cells were then incubated in KRH buffer (NaCl 121 mM, KCl 4.9 mM, MgSO4 1.2 mM, CaCl2 0.33 mM, HEPES 12 mM, pH7.4) for 4 hrs at 37 oC, followed by washing three times in KRH buffer. Glucose uptake was measured by incubating cells with 2-deoxy-D-[3H] glucose 0.5Ci/ml (Perkin-Elmer) for 5 min at 37 °C. After cold PBS washing three times, cells were lysed with 1% Triton X-100 solution and subjected to scintillation counting. Non-specific uptake was measured in the presence of cytochalasin B 10 M and subtracted from total uptake.
Cells were plated in gelatin-coated XF24-well cell culture microplates (Seahorse Bioscience) and differentiated into adipocytes. Cells were incubated in pre-warmed unbuffered DMEM medium (DMEM containing GlutaMax 2 mM, sodium pyruvate 1 mM, NaCl 1.85 g/L, and glucose 25 mM) for 1h. The oxygen consumption was measured by the XF24 Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Biosciences). Mitochondrial function was profiled by injecting, oligomycin 2 M, CCCP 0.5 M (carbonyl cyanide trifluoromethoxyphenylhydrazone), and antimycin A 5 M in succession. OCR was determined by plotting the oxygen tension of the medium in the chamber as a function of time (pMoles/min).
H4IIE hepatocytes (ATCC) were seeded at 200,000 cells per well in a 24 well collagen I coated plate. The cells were incubated in MEM media (ATCC supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma) and Penicillin/Streptomycin) with 5 M BAIBA (n = 6), 1 M GW6471 PPAR antagonist (n = 6), and 1 M GW6471 and 5 M BAIBA (n = 6) for 6 days.
H4IIE hepatocytes were grown for 6 days in Oxoplates (PreSens) with MEM + 10% FBS media (Sigma Aldrich). Cells were plated at 40,000 cells per well and BAIBA or BAIBA and 1 M GW6471 PPAR antagonist were added on the same day. The OxoPlate OP96F (PreSens, Regens- burg, Germany) contains oxygen-sensitive particles PSLi-Pt-1 (Opto-Sense, Worth, Germany), which consist of small polystyrene particles. Sulforhodamin is covalently attached to these particles as reference dye, and a platinum porphin is incorporated as indicator dye. The sensor has a thickness of about 10 m and is fixed at the bottom of each well of a 96-flat bottom-well plate (Greiner, Frickenhausen, Germany). Basal serum-free MEM media (100 l) containing BAIBA in a range of concentrations (0-10 M) (n = 6 per dose) and BAIBA in the presence of 1 M GW6471 PPAR antagonist (n = 6 per dose) was added into the wells of an OxoPlate. The media was exchanged every two days with the addition of fresh compounds. After 6 days each well was then overlaid with 250 l of mineral oil after the addition of 5 M of final concentration of Carbonyl cyanide 4-(trifluoromethoxy)phenylhydrazone (FCCP). Wells containing oxygen-free water (cal 0) and air-saturated water (cal 100) served as standards. Oxygen-free water was prepared by dissolving 1 g of sodium sulfite in 100 mL of water. Water is oxygen free after approximately 1 min. Air-saturated water was prepared by shaking 100 mL of water vigorously for 2 min. The oxygen concentration in each well was measured right after mineral oil addition, 15 min and 30 min after mineral oil addition. Fluorescence of each well was measured in dual kinetic mode (Multiskan Ascent CF, Thermo Lab- systems, Vantaa, Finland). Filter pair 1 (544/650 nm) detects fluorescence of the indicator dye. The second filter pair (544/590 nm) measures fluorescence of the reference dye. Oxygen tension was calculated according to the Stern-Volmer equation and transformed into nmol of oxygen . The difference between baseline, 15 min and 30 min oxygen tension was used to calculate the oxygen consumption per min per well.
Muscle specific PGC-1 transgenic mice were generated and maintained as previously described. For the exercise experiments, 12-week-old B6 mice were used (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME). Endurance exercise was carried out using free wheel running for 3 weeks (n = 6). Controls were age matched sedentary littermates (n = 6). For the short term BAIBA treatment cohort, 6 week old C57BL6/J mice (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME) were weight-matched and assigned to groups for treatment. Mice were treated with either 100 mg/kg/day or 170 mg/kg/day BAIBA in their drinking water for 2 weeks and fed a standard chow diet ad libitum (Prolab RMH 3000-5P75, Labdiet, Brentwood, MO). 129S4/SvJae-Pparatm1Gonz/J mice (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME) were weight-matched and assigned to groups for treatment. Mice were treated with 100 mg/kg/day BAIBA in their drinking water for 2 weeks and fed a standard chow diet ad libitum. For the long term BAIBA treatment cohort, 6 week old C57BL6/J mice (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME) were weight-matched and assigned to groups for treatment (n=11 per group). Mice were treated with 100 mg/kg/day BAIBA in their drinking water for 14 weeks and fed a high fat diet ad libitum (60% Fat, DIO-VHFD Research Diets Inc. New Brunswick, NJ).
Study mice were fasted, sacked and plasma was collected via left ventricular puncture at completion of the study (Week 16). Inguinal WAT and liver was rapidly dissected, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at80 °C until mRNA extraction. All mice were housed in a controlled temperature, lighting and humidity environment.
All experiments were performed with 6-week old mice treated with either BAIBA (100 mg/kg/day) or water for 14 weeks (n=8 mice per group). A PhenoMaster system (TSE Systems, Calo-(D)/Feed/BWXZ, 16 mice) was used to monitor oxygen consumption, carbon dioxide production, food intake, daily body mass, and locomotory activity. The PhenoMaster system was calibrated before each experiment. Animals were subjected to a 7-day acclimation period in a training cage without monitoring to habituate to the environment of the metabolic cages. Animals were maintained in normal cedar bedding at 22°C throughout the monitoring period. Twice hourly measurements for each animal were obtained for oxygen and carbon dioxide with ad libitum access to food and water (or water plus BAIBA) on a controlled 12-hour light/dark cycle. Cages contained one mass sensor to monitor food intake and a second sensor attached to a glass housing to measure body mass. Oxygen consumption is expressed normalized to body mass.
Mice were fasted for 6 hours with free access to water prior to baseline glucose measurements (n=11 mice per group). Administration of glucose (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) was performed by intraperitoneal injection (glucose 1.5mg /gram of body weight; glucose solution 150mg/ml). Blood was obtained from the tail vein immediately prior to glucose injection and then at 30, 60 and 120 minutes post injection. Glucose levels were measured using a Bayer Contour Glucose Meter (Bayer Healthcare, Mishawaka, IL).
Total RNA from human cell lines, mouse inguinal WAT stromal vascular fraction derived primary adipocytes, hepatocytes, and mouse WAT and liver was extracted with Trizol (Invitrogen) and purified via the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturers instructions. The RNA yield was determined using the NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies). RNA was normalized and converted to cDNA using the Superscript First-Strand Kit (Invitrogen). Quantitative RT-PCR was performed using a Realplex Mastercycler (Eppendorf) with the Quantifast-SYBR Green PCR mix (Qiagen). All data were normalized to 18SrRNA or HPRT and quantitative measures obtained using the --CT method.
The Framingham Offspring Study was initiated in 1971, when 5,124 individuals enrolled into a longitudinal cohort study to examine risk factors for cardiovascular disease. We studied individuals attending a routine examination of this cohort that took place between 1991 and 1995. Of 3,799 attendees to the examination, 2,067 were eligible for the present investigation because they were free of diabetes and cardiovascular disease, and had measurement of BAIBA concentrations in fasting plasma samples. Fasting insulin and glucose were also measured as previously described.
Genotyping was performed on the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Mapping 500K Array SetR and 50K Human Gene Focused PanelR. After filtering out 15586 SNPs with Hardy-Weinberg p<1e-6, 64511 SNPs with missing rate >3%, 45361 SNPs with mishap test p<1e-9 (mishap test in PLINK, http://pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/purcell/plink/), 4857 SNPs with >100 Mendel errors, 67269 SNPs with minor allele frequency < 0.01, 2 SNPs due to strandedness issues upon merging data with HapMap, and a further 13394 SNPs not present on HapMap, a total of 378,163 SNPs were used in the imputation for 2,543,887 autosomal SNPs. MACH software (http://www.sph.umich.edu/csg/abecasis/MACH) version 1.0.15 with HapMap release 22, build 26, as a reference panel was used.
Imputation on X chromosome: After filtering out 159 SNPs with Hardy-Weinberg p<1e-6, 450 SNPs with missing rate > 3%, 1,851 SNPs with minor allele frequency < 0.01, 12 SNPs with a male heterozygote count > 45, and 619 SNPs not included in the HapMap legend files, 7,795 SNPs were used in the imputation for 62,876 X chromosome SNPs. We used IMPUTE software (https://mathgen.stats.ox.ac.uk/impute/impute.html) version 0.5.0 with Hapmap Build 35 release 21 as a reference panel.
The human study protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Boards of Boston University Medical Center and Massachusetts General Hospital, and all participants provided written informed consent.
The HERITAGE Family Study is a clinical trial that enrolled 557 individuals of various ages (1665 y) to determine the effects of 20-weeks of highly-controlled endurance training on physiologic measures and risk factors for cardiometabolic disease. Only individuals who were previously sedentary, free of pre-existing disease, and not taking any medications that would affect any of the outcome variables were allowed to enter the study. Details of the aims, experimental design, and measurement protocols of the HERITAGE Family Study were presented in detail in a previous publication. Endurance training was conducted (3 d/wk for a total of 60 exercise sessions) on cycle ergometers that were computer controlled to maintain the participants heart rates at fixed percentages of their aerobic capacity (VO2max). The training program started at 55% of VO2max for 30 min/session and gradually increased to 75% of VO2max for 50 min/session, where it was maintained during the last 6 wk of training. Peripheral plasma samples collected from 80 HERITAGE participants before and after the 20-week endurance training program were subjected to metabolomic profiling.
Metabolic profiling of amino acids, biogenic amines and other polar plasma metabolites were analyzed by LC-MS as previously described. In brief, formic acid, ammonium acetate, LC-MSgrade solvents and valine-d8 were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Phenylalanine-d8 was purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories. Plasma and media samples were prepared for LC-MS analyses via protein precipitation with the addition of nine volumes of 74.9:24.9:0.2 vol/vol/vol acetonitrile/methanol/formic acid containing two additional stable isotope-labeled internal standards for valine-d8 and phenylalanine-d8. The samples were centrifuged (10 min, 15,000g, 4 °C), and the supernatants were injected directly. Metabolite concentrations were determined using the standard addition method.
For metabolite analyses in FHS, log transformation of BAIBA concentrations was applied to approximate a normal distribution. Partial correlation coefficients were estimated between BAIBA and the following metabolic variables, after adjustment for age and sex: body mass index (BMI), fasting glucose, fasting insulin, total cholesterol, triglycerides, homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) and the homeostasis model assessment of -cell function (HOMA-B), calculated as previously described.
For FHS GWAS analyses a linear mixed effects model that accounts for familial relatedness with an additive genetic model with one degree of freedom was used.
For animal studies, all results, unless otherwise stated, are expressed as means, and error bars depict SEMs. A two tailed Students t test or ANOVA was used to determine P values.