This study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the Rockefeller University Hospital and the Weill Medical College of Cornell University. Clinical data and specimens were collected after obtaining participants' written informed consent.
Primary tubule epithelial cell cultures were derived from microdissected renal tubules and explanted kidney tissues from adults without parenchymal kidney disease prepared for transplant donation but deemed unsuitable due to renal vascular structural abnormalities (NŠ=Š8) or early stage ADPKD (NŠ=Š6, National Disease Research Interchange, Philadelphia); from surgical nephrectomy of end stage kidneys from patients with ADPKD (NŠ=Š4, PKD Foundation, Kansas) or from normal fetal kidneys after elective pregnancy termination (NŠ=Š7, Anatomic Gift Foundation, Philadelphia). Primary epithelial cells were grown to confluence in cell-type-specific supplemented media according to published techniques (Figure S1). Details of harvesting and expression markers in specimens used in this study were previously described. RNA from immortalized tubular cells and podocytes were obtained for additional perspective.
We collected urine specimens from 20 patients with ADPKD and 20 patients with CKD of other etiologies, matched for age, sex, ethnicity/race and CKD stage ( Table 1 ). Patients with active immune disorders affecting the kidneys were excluded. This component of the study is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (identifier: NCT01114594). ADPKD patients enrolled in this study were also registered into an ongoing data repository (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00792155). Total RNA was extracted from 50 ml urine sediment cells and from the ensuing cell-free, ultrafiltration-retained supernatant, a 250-fold concentrate of urine particles and macromolecules >100 kDa, thus including vesicle-enclosed RNA (VS2042, Vivaproducts Inc., Littleton MA) (see Figure S2). Small-RNA cDNA libraries were constructed and sequenced with modifications for small amounts of input RNA. Details of head-to-head comparison between precipitation-purified and silica column-purified RNA are shown in Figure S3 .
Extracted total RNA was subjected to barcoded adapter ligation, and the reverse-transcribed small-RNA libraries were deep sequenced on Illumina Genome Analyzer II, as previously described. The resulting sequence files were trimmed and split into the separate samples according to the barcode sequences. Extracted reads were assigned annotations by aligning to the genome and small-RNA databases. For miRNA annotation we used contemporary in-house definitions.
We display miRNA according to our recently published definitions. Briefly, reads from multi-copy miRNA are summed into single entries. For example, miR-24-1 and miR-24-2 are represented by miR-24-1(2); the number in parenthesis symbolizes the number of members. Alternatively, reads from miRNA that share pri-miRNA cistronic transcription units are collapsed into miRNA cistron (precursor) clusters. For example, cluster-mir-23a(3) represents miR-23a, miR-24-2 and miR-27a. Lastly, miRNA with extensive sequence similarity are collapsed into sequence families. For example, miR-23a and miR-23b are members of seqfam-miR-23a(2). For analysis of differential expression we employ the cistron cluster arrangement, as cistron cluster members are co-transcribed and their levels are thus highly correlated. However, when analyzing extracellular RNA (urine exosomes), secretion into the biofluid and stability in the biofluid affect miRNA levels, eliminating correlation between cistron cluster members.
PASW 17.0 Statistics (www.spss.com) and the edgeR package for RNA sequencing on R platform were used for statistical analyses. Patient characteristics were compared between ADPKD and other-CKD groups using standard t-tests. Individual patient/sample miRNA data are displayed in supplementary tables as counts derived from deep sequencing reads. In addition, counts are aggregated according to miRNA sequence families and precursor cluster cistrons and presented in the respective supplementary tables (see above). Analyses of differential expression between ADPKD and non-ADPKD groups of samples were conducted under the assumption that gene (miRNA) counts in RNA deep sequencing data follow negative binomial distribution. The R/Bioconductor statistical package edgeR was developed with the negative binomial distribution assumption at its core. In generalized linear negative binomial models fitted with edgeR, the dependent variables are the genewise miRNA counts (expressed as counts per million miRNA counts, CPM) while the independent variable we included were disease group (e.g. ADPKD vs. other CKD urine cell pellets) and patient sex (when relevant). Fold-change values in miRNA abundance between the two groups of samples are calculated as the ratio of mean CPM in ADPKD to the mean CPM in the non-ADPKD group, and transformed to log base 2. P-values for coefficients in the model are computed by genewise likelihood ratio tests (or quasi-likelihood F-tests). Dispersion, which reflects biological variation, is estimated using the Cox-Reid method, and is inherent in the modeling procedure. Thus, within group variability impacts the statistical inference. Nominal P-values<0.05 are considered significant, provided that false detection rate (FDR) computed with the Benjamini-Hochberg method is less than 0.2.