No human tissue was used in this study. All of the animals used in this study received humane care based on guidelines set by the American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) as well as in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (Institute for Laboratory Animal Research, Washington, DC). All protocols involving live animals are reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of LSU Health Sciences Center-Shreveport. This set of experiments was conducted under the approved protocol P-07-059. All efforts were made to minimize animal suffering, to reduce the number of animals used, and to utilize alternatives to in vivo techniques, if available.
The human prostate cancer cell line DU-145 was purchased from ATCC and maintained in RPMI-1640 (Mediatech) with 10% FBS (Gemini Bio-Products) and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (Mediatech). Cells were maintained in a 37°C incubator with 5% CO2 and were sub-cultured upon attaining >75% confluence.
Phalloidin, 1100 was purchased from Molecular Probes. -Tubulin antibody, 11000, was purchased from Lab Vision. LAMP-1 antibody (H4A3), 150, was purchased from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank at the University of Iowa, USA. The following antibodies were used for Western bloting: pMet, pAkt, pErk1/2, (11000), cleaved-caspase-3 (1200) (Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA, USA), Rab7 (11000) (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA), c-Met (tissue samples 1500) (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), c-Met (11000) (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), Ki67 (150) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies (1100) were purchased from Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories (Westrgrove, PA, USA). IHC secondary antibodies (1200) were purchased from Vector Labs (Burlingame, CA, USA). HGF (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA, USA) was used at 33 ng/ml.
Frozen tumor samples were first diluted in ice cold RIPA buffer containing Roche protease inhibitors cocktail (Indianapolis, IN, USA), NaF, and NaVO4 at a 15 ratio, mass to volume. Samples were manually homogenized using a mortar and pestle followed by brief sonication, and placed on ice for 20 minutes with periodic vortexing. Samples were then centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 minutes to remove insoluble debris. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay and equal protein was diluted in Laemmli buffer and boiled for 10 minutes.
Assay was performed as previously described. HGF was added to cultures for 18 hrs at 33 ng/ml.
I.F. microscopy was performed as previously described. Briefly, cells were fixed with ice cold 4% PFA for 20minutes. Cells were then washed in PBS then incubated with anti-LAMP-1 (H4A3-s Iowa State University Hybridoma Bank) at a 1100 dilution in BSP for one hour at room temperature. Cells were then washed, and incubated with Dylight 594 anti mouse (Jackson IR) at a 1100 dilution in BSP for one hour at room temperature. Phalloidin was then used to stain the actin cytoskeleton (Phalloidin 488, Molecular Probes) and was incubated for 20 minutes at 1200 in BSP at room temperature. Slides were mounted with DAPI containing SlowFade gold reagent (Invitrogen S36938). Cells were imaged using an Olympus BX-50 microscope using MetaMorph software. Images were merged using ImageJ.
Lysosome distribution from the nucleus was measured using the LysoTracker software, a generous gift from Meiyappan Solaiyappan (Johns Hopkins). A total of 25 cells spanning from three independent experiments were analyzed for each data set.
Western blot analysis was performed as previously described.
Short hairpin RNAs (shRNA) directed towards Rab7 (CCGGGCCACAATAGGAGCTGACTTTCTCGAGAAAGTCAGCTCCTATTGTGGCTTTTT )were delivered into DU145 prostate cancer cells (creating stable Rab7 shRNA expressing cells) using Mission Lentiviral Transduction Particles (Sigma) according to manufacturers protocol and as previously described. Non Target shRNA expressing cells were generated using the same method with a control vector targeting no known mammalian genes (Sigma shc202V).
Invasion assays were performed as previously described. HGF was added in serum free media to both the top and bottom chambers at a concentration of 33 ng/ml. Results represent the average number of invaded cells in four fields of view per condition from three independent experiments.
Six to 8 week old male SCID/bg mice were injected with 2106 DU145 prostate tumor cells stably expressing either scrambled (non-target; NT) shRNA or shRNA directed to Rab7 in 100 µl PBS subcutaneously (nŠ=Š6 NT shRNA; nŠ=Š7 Rab7 shRNA). Tumors became measurable by day 41 post-implantation and were measured with digital calipers twice per week. Tumor volumes were calculated by the equation: VolumeŠ=ŠÏ/6 * Length * Width2. Mice were euthanized at 104 days post-implantation and tumors were surgically removed and fixed in 10 percent formaldehyde or frozen. All experiments were performed in accordance with guidelines set by the LSUHSC-S Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Immunohistochemistry was performed utilizing standard DAB techniques. Briefly, the formalin fixed tumors were processed and embedded in paraffin. These blocks were then sectioned, deparaffinized, and rehydrated in xylene and graded ethanol washes. Antigens were unmasked with preheated antigen retrieval buffer for 15 min and then cooled. 0.3% H2O2 in methanol was placed on the slides for 30 min to block endogenous peroxides, followed by a protein (serum) block for 10 min. Primary antibody was then added for 1 hr at the indicated dilution. Biotinylated secondary antibody (1200) was then added for 30 min. Biotin binding was increased using the ABC Elite method (Vector Labs) for 30 min and stains were visualized with DAB (Vector Labs) for 7 min. Slides were counterstained with hematoxylin for 2 min.
GraphPad Software, Prism 3.0 was utilized to perform all statistics. One or Two-Tailed Mann-Whitney T-tests were performed to indicate statistical significance. All graphs show the standard error of the mean (s.e.m.).