Recombinant extracellular domains (ECD) from human and cynomolgus monkey EMR-1 were expressed as Fc-fusion proteins in CHO cells. After purification on protein-A columns, Fc tags were proteolytically removed using Factor Xa, and human EMR1 ECD was used for immunization in mice. The mouse hybridoma line, 1E7, which expresses high-affinity anti-EMR1 monoclonal antibody was grown in Hybridoma SFM media (Invitrogen). Afucosylated and fucosylated chimeric 1E7 antibodies with human IgG1 kappa constant regions were expressed in Potelligent CHOK1SV (Biowa/Lonza). Murine and chimeric 1E7 antibodies were purified by protein-A affinity chromatography.
Eosinophilic subjects (EOS, n=38) underwent detailed clinical and laboratory evaluation as part of an Institutional Review Board (IRB)approved clinical protocol to study eosinophilia (NCT00001406) and included subjects with idiopathic HES (n=18), lymphocytic variant HES (n=7), helminth infection (n=4), hypereosinophilia of unknown significance (n=3), PDGFRA-associated myeloproliferative neoplasm (n=3) and familial eosinophilia (n=2). Six subjects were on therapy at the time of study, but had persistent eosinophilia (geometric mean (GM) absolute eosinophil count (AEC) 2167/L, range 910-13000/L). Healthy volunteers were recruited under an IRB-approved clinical protocol designed to obtain controls for in vitro research (NCT00090662). All participants gave written informed consent.
Granulocytes and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were separated by sedimentation over Ficoll-Hypaque (Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden). Erythrocytes were lysed by hypotonic shock with ice-cold ddH2O (for granulocytes) or ACK lysing buffer (for PBMCs). Individual cell populations were purified using magnetic bead selection on an AutoMacs (Miltenyi Biotech, Cambridge, MA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Eosinophils and neutrophils were purified from the granulocyte layer using the Eosinophil Isolation Kit. NK cells, CD14+ monocytes and CD34+ stem cells were purified from the PBMC layer using the NK Cell Isolation Kit, anti-CD14 beads and anti-CD34 beads, respectively (Miltenyi Biotech). Granulocyte purity was determined by counting a minimum of 300 cells on cytospin preparations stained with Diff-Quik (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics). Purity of other cells was determined by flow cytometry. Purity was >98% for all cell populations studied. Cells for RNA expression analysis were counted and put directly in TriZol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) at a concentration of 10106/ml.
Purified peripheral blood eosinophils were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS, Biowhittaker), 25 mM HEPES, 2 mM L-glutamine, 10 mM sodium pyruvate, and 50 g/mL of gentamycin (culture medium (CM)). The leukemic cell line EOL1 (DSMZ Institute, Braunschweig, Germany), the erythroleukemia cell line K562 (ATCC CCL-243„¢, Manassas, VA), and the histiocytic lymphoma U937 (ATCC CRL-1593.2„¢) were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium with 10% FCS at 37°C. AML14.3D10 (ATCC CRL-12079„¢) was maintained in CM containing 50 M -mercaptoethanol. CHO cells transfected with EMR1 (CHOK1SV) were cultured in CD-CHO (Invitrogen) supplemented with 25 M L-methionine sulfoximine.
EMR1 expression in bone marrow aspirates and peripheral blood was assessed by multiparameter flow cytometry using directly-conjugated antibodies as previously described (see Online supplement for detailed methodology).
Total RNA was extracted from purified cell populations and cell lines using TriZol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), and cDNA was synthesized from 1 g total RNA using High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. cDNA from human CD34+ cells cultured under conditions to induce mast cell differentiation and from the mast cell lines, HMC-1.1 (lacking KIT D816V), HMC-1.2 (expressing KIT D816V), and LAD2 were provided by Dr. Todd Wilson, NIAID/NIH. Approximately 50 ng of RNA equivalent cDNA template was used per well and real-time amplification was performed in a 96- well plate using a GeneAmp 7900HT Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems). Primers used are provided in the Online supplement. Each sample was run in triplicate, and cycle threshold values were normalized using 18S cycle threshold values from corresponding samples.
Human CD34+ cells isolated by positive selection from granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)-mobilized peripheral blood of two healthy donors (provided by Dr. Harry Malech, NIAID/NIH) were cultured in IMDM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS and GM-CSF (1 ng/ml), SCF, Flt3-L and TPO (each at 10 ng/ml), IL-5 (25 ng/ml), IL-3 (20 ng/ml) for 3 days, followed by IL-5 (25 ng/ml) only for another 21 days. Cells were collected on days 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 15, 18, 21, and 24 of culture, and total RNA and cell lysates prepared at each time point. Eosinophil differentiation was assessed using Diff-Quik (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics) and Fast Green/Neutral Red (Sigma-Aldrich) staining. At 21 days of culture, >60% of the cells were eosinophil-like by morphologic criteria and >20% were mature eosinophils based on Fast Green staining of cytoplasmic granules. Growth and viability were determined by light microscopic evaluation with trypan blue exclusion. Viability remained >95% throughout the 24-day experimental period.
A 5 mm skin punch biopsy obtained from a patient with HES was bisected. One half of the specimen was fixed in neutral buffered formalin, routinely processed, sectioned, and stained with Hematoxylin & Eosin (H&E) per standard procedures of the Laboratory of Pathology, NCI. Immunohistochemical staining for eosinophil peroxidase (EPX) was performed using a mouse anti-mouse monoclonal antibody (1:500, provided by Dr. J.J. Lee). The second portion was snap frozen for immunostaining with anti-EMR1 antibody (c1E7) using standard techniques (see Online supplement for detailed methodology).
Acetone-fixed nasal polyp frozen tissue section slides obtained from Capital Biosciences (female patient; CRSwNP and bronchial asthma; 39 years old) were stained with mouse 1E7-Alexa595 (0.6 g/ml), mouse anti-EPX antibody (Abcam; diluted 1:200 with 2% BSA with PBS) and/or mouse anti-CD68 (Ventana; clone KP-1, diluted 1:2) using standard techniques for visualization by immunofluorescence microscopy (see Online supplement for detailed methodology).
Plasma levels of sEMR1 were measured by sandwich ELISA (MyBiosources). All assays were performed in singlicate, and values were calculated on the basis of a standard curve. The minimal detectable concentration of sEMR1 in plasma was 10 pg/mL.
Purified eosinophils (8104, target) were incubated with autologous NK cells (effector) at an effector/target ratio of 5:1 in 96-well U-bottom plates at 37°C in the presence or absence of 10 g/ml afucosylated c1E7 or IgG1 isotype control antibodies. After 4 hours, the assay was stopped by putting the plates on ice and replacing the culture medium with binding buffer (100 1/well, BD Biosciences). Annexin V FITC (BD Biosciences) was added and after 15 min incubation at room temperature, samples were acquired and analyzed on a flow cytometer (LSRII, BD Biosciences). Eosinophils were identified based on their granularity (high side scatter). ADCC was determined by gating on Annexin Vpositive target cells.
Male cynomolgus macaques received a single intravenous infusion of c1E7 at either 1 mg/kg (n=2) or 5 mg/kg (n=2) at Bio-Quant (San Diego) under a protocol approved by Bio-Quant's IACUC and the attending veterinarian. Whole blood was collected for PK analysis and eosinophil count at baseline, 5 minutes, 2,4, and 8, hours and 1,2,4,8,15,22,and 28 days after dosing. The plasma concentration of c1E7 was measured using a quantitative antigen-based ELISA (see Online Supplement for detailed methods). Complete blood counts and serum chemistries were performed pre-dose and on days 8, 28, 42 and 56.
Statistical analyses were performed using the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U and Wilcoxon tests for unpaired and paired comparisons of group means, respectively, and Spearman rank for correlation. P<0.05 was considered significant for all analyses. Pharmacokinetic analysis was performed using a non-compartmental model (see Online Supplement).