The protocol for this trial and supporting TREND Statement checklist are available as supporting information; see Checklist S1 and Protocol S1.
Thirty Chinese patients suffering from persistent AR with significant nasal symptoms (e.g., nasal itching, sneezing, nasal obstruction and rhinorrhea) were recruited in the outpatient clinic in the First Affiliated Medical Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University from Sept.8th, 2008 to Oct.28th, 2011 ( Fig. 1 ). All AR patients were diagnosed by an ENT/allergy specialist following the criteria from the ARIA document. The inclusion criteria for the study patients were (1) age above 18 years old; (2) having persistent AR symptoms during the past two consecutive years; (3) allergic sensitization to Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, & Dermatophagoides farinae confirmed by both skin prick test (SPT) and ImmunoCap (Phadia, Uppsala, Sweden); (4) no previous treatment of SIT; and (5) negative SPT results to other common inhalant allergens (e.g., common pollens, cockroach, fungi, and animal dander).
The serum specific IgE (sIgE) to Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus & Dermatophagoides farinae was measured by the ImmunoCap test (Phadia) and a value of more than 0.35 kUA/l was considered a positive allergic response. In addition, 20 healthy volunteers (11 males, 9 females, median age 28 years) without any allergy history were selected as a control group. The non-atopic status of healthy controls was double confirmed by a negative SPT to all common inhalant allergens and a negative result of Phadiatop test (Phadia). All recruited subjects (both AR patients and controls) did not have an infection, asthma, autoimmune diseases, or other upper airway diseases such as septal deviation, nasal polyps, or sinusitis before enrolment. Furthermore, the patients and control subjects had not received any form of steroids or SIT at least six months before the study. Both patients and healthy controls were given written consent to undergo the clinical study. The study was approved by the ethics committee of the First Affiliated Medical Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University in Guangzhou, China.
AR patients received subcutaneous SIT for 2 years. SIT was performed by ENT clinicians in the clinic, using with a standardized mite depot-allergen extract (50% Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus & and 50% Dermatophagoides farinae) according to the recommendations of the manufacturer Allergopharma Joachim Ganzer KG (Reinbek, Germany). The build-up phase (25 weeks) began at 5 TU/ml of the final concentration and increased to 50 TU/ml, 500 TU/ml, and 5000 TU/ml at 5-week intervals as tolerated. Maintenance immunotherapy was administrated with the 5000 TU/ml concentration bi-weekly for 54 weeks and then tri-weekly for 27 weeks (Fig. S1). The adjustment in the dosing schedule was mainly based on the tolerance of dose and the occurrence of adverse reactions. None of the study patients have developed any systemic disease (e.g., Asthma) or other nasal diseases (e.g., rhinosinusitis) during the 2-year SIT treatment period. Five patients did not complete the 2-year course of the treatment ( Fig. 1 ). The reasons for the loss of follow-up are (1) patients (nŠ=Š3) migrated to another city; (2) patient (nŠ=Š1) reported improvement of the symptom and decided to terminate the treatment; and (3) patient (nŠ=Š1) could not afford the medical fee.
Blood samples from AR patients were collected before the initiation of SIT (baseline, SIT-untreated) and after the end of the SIT course (the third year, SIT-treated) (Fig. S1). Control patients blood was also sampled at the beginning of the study. PBMCs (interface) and plasma (upper layer) were isolated from blood samples by using a density centrifugation method with Ficoll-Paque Plus (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB, Uppsala, Sweden). Detail of sample collection procedure was described in the Material and Methods S1.
PBMCs were challenged with the HDM allergen. The stimulation protocol was described in the Material and Methods S1 and a previous study.
Total RNA was extracted from PBMCs by using Trizol (Invitrogen) according to the manufactures protocol. RNA was reversely transcribed and real-time RT PCR measurement was performed by using ABI 7300 PCR system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Relative gene expression was analyzed using the comparative 2Ct method as previously described. Sequences of the primer and Tamara probe for IL17, RORC, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) are shown in the Material and Methods S1.
Concentrations of IL6, IL17, IL23 and IL27 in undiluted plasma from SIT-untreated and SIT-treated patients were determined by Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) kits (USCNLIFE, Wuhan, China). IL17 levels were further measured in the supernatants from HDM-stimulated PBMCs. Cytokine production was detected and analyzed by Synergy HT Multi-Mode Microplate Reader (BioTek, Winooski, VT). The details of ELISA analysis are described in the Material and Methods S1.
PBMCs were stained with surface markers PE-cy5-labeled anti-human CD4 monoclonal antibody (mAb) and APC-Cy7-labeled anti-human CD3 mAb at room temperature for 30 minutes. The samples were fixed with Fixation Solution (eBioscience, San Diego, CA) at 4°Cfor 20 minutes in dark. Cells were then re-suspended and permeabilized in Permeabilization Buffer (eBioscience) to facilitate the intracellular staining. PBMCs were stained with intracellular cytokines by using PE-labeled anti-human IL4 mAb, PerCP-labeled anti-human IFNG mAb, APC-labeled anti-human IL10 and FITC-labeled anti-human IL17 mAb for 30 minutes at room temperature. Finally, the stained cells were re-suspended in FACS lysing solution (BD Bioscience, San Diego, CA) and stored at 4°C in dark prior to acquisition. All antibodies for both surface and intracellular markers were obtained from BD Bioscience. The PBMC samples stained without primary antibody and stained with species- and subtype-matched isotype controls were served as negative controls. Samples were run on a FACSCalibur Flow Cytometer (BD Biosciences) and were gated by CD3/CD4 positive cells; the data was analyzed by using CellQuest software (BD Biosciences).
The effectiveness of SIT was evaluated based on the patients clinical symptoms of AR. The symptom score was analyzed using the VAS system according to the ARIA document. All patients were coded confidentially and VAS was evaluated independently by a clinician in a blinded manner. The fold change of VAS value in AR patients after SIT treatment was calculated by the formula: VAS (SIT-untreated)/VAS (SIT-treated). The details of how to perform VAS evaluation are described in the Material and Methods S1.
All data were analyzed using the SPSS statistical software V17.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). mRNA/protein levels of the cytokines and percentages of the Th cell subtypes, were compared in PBMCs isolated from SIT-untreated, SIT-treated, and control subjects. Wilcoxon matched pairs sign rank test was used to compare the differences of these molecular markers in PBMCs from SIT-treated versus SIT-untreated patients, and HDM-treated versus HDM-untreated in vitro samples. The Mann-Whitney two-tailed test was performed to compare the differences of these molecular markers in PBMCs between either SIT-treated or SIT-untreated subjects, versus controls. Change of VAS value was analyzed between SIT-untreated and SIT-treated patients by Wilcoxon matched pairs sign rank test. The correlation between VAS values versus mRNA/protein levels of IL17 and RORC, and VAS fold change versus mRNA/protein level fold change of IL17 and RORC in AR patients were evaluated by Spearman rank analysis. Statistical significance was accepted when the p-value <0.05.