A total of 36 healthy men and women between 18 and 50 years of age who met the eligibility criteria were included in this study. A detailed description of the protocol, participant recruitment and enrolment, inclusion and exclusion criteria and compliance is given elsewhere. In brief, exclusion criteria were fasting levels of total cholesterol >7.5 mmol L1, triglycerides >4 mmol L1, glucose >6.0 mmol L1 and C-reactive protein (CRP) >10 mg L1, body mass index (BMI) ¥30 kg m2 and blood pressure (¥160/100 mmHg). The study was performed at the Akershus University College, Norway between September and December 2009.
Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. The study was approved by the Regional Committee of Medical Ethics (approval no. 6.2008.2215) and by the Norwegian Social Science Data Services (approval no. 21924), and was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
This study was part of a randomized, controlled, double-blind, three-arm, parallel-group study, designed to investigate the health effects of FO intake, in which the transcriptome was analysed as a pre-defined endpoint. Subjects were randomly assigned and stratified by gender into three groups using equal randomization (1:1:1). Data from only two of the intervention groups were analysed in the present study (see Fig.1). Subjects were required to take 16 capsules per day containing a total of 8 g day1 of either FO or high oleic sunflower oil (HOSO) for 7 weeks and were instructed to take the capsules with food (during a minimum of two meals). Subjects in the FO group received capsules containing a total of 0.7 g day1 EPA + 0.9 g day1 DHA from cod liver oil (Gadidae sp., EPA/DHA Oil 1200, TINE SA, Oslo, Norway) and subjects in the HOSO group received HOSO purchased from AarhusKarlshamn AB (Malm, Sweden). The fatty acid composition of the oils has been described elsewhere. The capsule containers were identical, and the capsules were the same size and to a large extent similar in colour.
Blood samples were collected for the transcriptome analyses from subjects at visits at 0, 3 and 7 weeks. Prior to the baseline visit (week 0), a 4-week washout period was included in which foods containing marine n-3 fatty acids were excluded from the diet. During the first 3 weeks of the intervention period, a fully controlled isocaloric diet, with all food and beverages provided by Akershus University College, was consumed. The composition of the diet and the food items provided in this study have previously been described. During the last 4 weeks of the intervention, the subjects returned to their habitual diet. No intake of fish, fish products, marine n-3-enriched food or additional dietary supplements was allowed during the entire study period of 11 weeks. The study was registered at www.clinicaltrial.gov (identification number NCT01034423).
Subjects were asked to refrain from alcohol consumption and vigorous physical activity the day prior to blood sampling. Venous blood samples were collected after an overnight fast (¥12 h) at the same time (2 h). Serum samples were kept at room temperature for 30 min before centrifugation (1500 g for 12 min). EDTA tubes with whole blood were kept at room temperature for a maximum of 48 h before counting the total number of lymphocytes and monocytes.
Fasting serum concentrations of high-sensitivity CRP, total-cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, triglycerides and glucose as well as lymphocyte and monocyte counts were measured by standard methods in a routine clinical laboratory (Frst Medical Laboratory, Oslo, Norway).
After blood collection, PBMCs were isolated using the BD Vacutainer Cell Preparation tubes according to the manufacturer's instructions (Becton, Dickinson and Co., Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). Pellets were frozen and stored at 80 °C until further RNA isolation.
Total RNA was isolated from all PBMC samples using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) with lysis buffer with the addition of -mercaptoethanol according to the manufacturer's instructions, and stored at 80 °C. RNA quantity and quality were measured using the ND 1000 Spectrophotometer (Saveen Werner AB, Limhamn, Sweden) and Agilent Bioanalyser (Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA), respectively. One sample had an RNA integrity number (RIN) score of 3.3; all other samples were above 8 (mean of 9.6). Nanodrop analysis did not indicate any contamination in the RNA samples.
Labelled extracts were prepared using Illumina TotalPrep RNA Amplification Kit (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The labelled extracts were hybridized to an Illumina HumanHT-12 v4 Expression BeadChip and scanned on an Illumina HiScan microarray scanner. Illumina GenomeStudio was used to transform bead-level data to probe-level intensity values and statistics, which were exported raw (unfiltered and non-normalized) for bioinformatic analysis. After hybridization and scanning, a manual quality control step was performed, investigating density plots and hierarchical clustering of raw probe densities. All samples, including the single sample with an RIN score of <8, displayed good characteristics and were included in further analyses.
Quantile normalization of the Illumina intensities was performed. To improve statistical power, probes without a detectable expression (detection P-value >0.01) in at least 10% of the samples were excluded from further analysis. Changes in gene expression were obtained by calculating log2 ratios between the intensities at baseline and after 7 weeks, and the two intervention groups were compared with regard to this ratio. Differentially expressed genes in each group and between groups were identified using the Linear Models for Microarray Data (Limma) package from Bioconductor (http://www.bioconductor.org) with R software. Genes with a nominal P-value <0.05 were defined as differentially regulated and subjected to further gene ontology analyses with DAVID software version 6.7 (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov). The list of differentially regulated genes was compared with a reference list (Homo Sapiens), and biological processes containing more than 10 genes and a False discovery rate (FDR) q-value of <0.1 was considered significantly modulated.
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) (http://www.broad.mit.edu/gsea/) was applied for the genes defined as expressed in PBMCs. The gene sets in the collection of C2 chemical and genetic perturbations (cgp) and C3 transcription factors from the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) were used separately. Permutation (1000) was performed on phenotypes, and gene sets were defined as significantly changed for FDR q-values of <0.25 as recommended for exploratory analyses by Broad Inst.
The leading edge genes contributing to the significance of the regulated gene sets were further analysed for functional and biological pathways using MetaCore (GeneGo, division of Thomson Reuters, St. Joseph, MI, USA) for better interpretation of the GSEA result. MetaCore software is a knowledge database suitable for pathway analysis of experimental data and gene lists. The Minimum information about a microarray experiment (MIAME) standards were followed in the analysis and storage of data. The raw data are available from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (accession number GSE48368).
Randomization was carried out by LINK Medical Research AS (Oslo, Norway) using Microsoft Excel and its random generator. Differences in baseline characteristics and number of monocytes and lymphocytes between the groups at baseline or after 7 weeks were compared by Student's t-test or MannWhitney U test when normally and not normally distributed, respectively, using spss for windows (SPSS, version 19.0, IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, USA). The significance level was set to 5% (two-sided).