HIV-infected patients were enrolled into the study at the Quest Clinical Research (QCR; San Francisco, CA) and the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC; Pittsburgh, PA). The QCR and the UPMC part of the study were approved by the Western Institutional Review Board and the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Review Board, respectively. In both cases, written, informed consent was obtained from the patients prior to any study procedures.
Romidepsin was obtained from a US-based pharmacy as a marketed commercial formulation of the drug. Vorinostat, panobinostat, givinostat, mocetinostat and SB939 were obtained from Selleck Chemicals (Houston, TX). Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and ionomycin were obtained from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). All compounds were dissolved in DMSO. Effects of HDAC inhibitors in all assays and models used in this study have been compared to vehicle (i.e. DMSO) treated controls.
Plasmid pKS13 is a NL4-3-based vector in which the vpr and env genes were inactivated by inserting a ˜T base at the AflII site and two bases (TT) at the NdeI site, respectively, causing frame shifts in both open reading frames. A codon-optimized firefly luciferase gene was introduced in place of the nef gene by replacing the BamHI and NcoI fragment, yielding the plasmid pKS13. NL4-3-Luc virus was generated by co-transfection of HEK-293T cells with pKS13 and a plasmid containing the HIV-1 env gene using Lipofectamine 2000 (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY).
Total peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were obtained from healthy HIV-negative donors by leukapheresis (AllCells, Inc, Emeryville, CA). Naive CD4+ T cells were purified by negative selection using EasySep magnetic beads (StemCells, Inc, Vancouver, Canada) and cultured in RPMI with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin/streptomycin, 1% nonessential amino acids (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA), 1% sodium pyruvate (Life Technologies) and 495 nM beta-mercaptoethanol (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) in a 37°C, 5% CO2 incubator. Purified naive CD4+ T cells were activated by incubation with anti-CD3/CD28 magnetic Dynabeads (1 bead: 2 cells ratio, Life Technologies), 1 µg/ml anti-IL-4 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), 2 µg/ml anti-IL-12p70 antibodies (R&D Systems), and 10 ng/ml TGF- (R&D Systems) for 3 days. Following the removal of anti-CD3/CD28 beads and antibodies, cells were maintained in 30 U/ml IL-2 (Life Technologies) for 2 days. Cells were then infected with NL4.3-Luc in the presence of 50 µg/ml DEAE for 3 hours. Cells were maintained in the continued presence of 30 U/ml IL-2 throughout the infection and subsequent rest period with culture medium with fresh IL-2 replaced every 23 days. Seven days post-infection, 20 µl of latently infected cells were dispensed into 384 well plates using a MicroFlo dispenser (Biotek Insturments, VT) at 10,000 cells/well containing 100 nl of compound solutions delivered by the Echo acoustic-based liquid dispenser (Labcyte, Sunnyvale, CA). After a 48-hour incubation, 16 µl/well BriteGlo (Promega, Madison, WI) was added and luminescence measured using the Envision plate reader (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA). Compound-associated cytotoxicity was determined in latently infected cells in parallel with the virus activation assay. Cells were incubated with compounds for 48 hours at 37°C, and cell viability was determined using Cell Titer Glo reagent (Promega).
Seven days post-infection, cells infected with NL4-3-Luc virus were stimulated for 48 hours with test compounds. Cells were stained with fixable viability dye v450 (eBioscience, San Diego, CA) in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) +2% FBS for 30 minutes at 4°C. Cells were fixed with IC Fixation Buffer (eBioscience) for 20 minutes at room temperature in the dark followed by treatment with a permeabilization buffer (eBioscience) for 30 minutes at 4°C. Intracellular p24 was stained with anti-p24 antibody clone KC57-RD1 (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA), then washed and resuspended in PBS +2% FBS. The cells were analyzed on a LSR Fortessa (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) and collected data were processed using a FlowJo Analysis Software (TreeStar, Ashland, OR).
Determination of HDACi potency against individual HDAC enzymes was performed at Reaction Biology Corporation (Malvern, PA). In brief, human HDAC-1 to -11 enzymes were incubated with serial dilutions of HDACi and fluorogenic peptide substrates (50 µM) in a 96-well format assay. Concentrations of HDACi reducing the control activity of tested enzymes by 50% (IC50) were determined by a five-parameter curve fit of collected fluorescent signals. Fluorogenic peptide derived from p53 protein (amino acid residues 379382; RHKKAc) was used as a substrate for HDAC enzymes 1, 2, 3, 6, 10, and 11. A different fluorogenic peptide from p53 (amino acid residues 379382, RHKACKAC) was used as a substrate for HDAC-8. Fluorogenic peptide Boc-Lys(trifluoroacetyl)-AMC was used as a substrate for HDAC enzymes 4, 5, 7, and 9.
HIV-infected patients participating in the study were selected based on sustained plasma viral load suppression (<50 copies/ml for >12 months), CD4 counts (>350 cells/µL), and absence of co-infection with hepatitis B or C virus (Supplementary Table S1). Clinical laboratory results were reconfirmed 2 weeks before leukapheresis or blood draw. Leukapheresis was conducted for 34 hours, and samples were processed within 2 hours after collection. The leukapheresis product was diluted 11 with PBS and layered over Ficoll for isolation of PBMCs. PBMCs were treated with red blood cell lysis buffer (eBioscience) and rested overnight (10 million cells/ml) in tissue culture medium (RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FBS and PenStrep) before the isolation of memory CD4 T cells according to the manufacturer's recommendation (EasySep Human Memory CD4 T cell Enrichment Kit). Resting CD4 T cells were isolated by first enriching total CD4 T cells (StemCell Technologies) and subsequently depleting HLA-DR-, CD25-, and CD69-positive cells via negative selection (Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA). Flow cytometry was used to assess the purity of both T-cell subsets (>98%). Resting CD4 T cells for the analysis of continuous RMD exposure and longitudinal responses to RMD in the same donors were purified from fresh blood using the same protocol.
To assess HIV activation by HDACi, up to 5 million CD4 T cells were plated in 24-well plates in 2.5 ml of media, supplemented with antiretrovirals (ARVs) (100 nM elvitegravir and 100300 nM efavirenz) for the entire duration of culture incubation. HDACi were added at specified concentrations on day 0 and cells or culture supernatants were harvested for the analysis of HIV RNA at the indicated time points (648 hours or 67 days, respectively). For HDACi pulse treatment, cultures were washed twice using ARV-containing media at 4 or 24 hours after addition of HDACi and incubated with ARVs until harvest. To measure HIV RNA levels, 1 ml of culture supernatant was analyzed by a robotic COBAS AmpliPrep/TaqMan system (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN), which extracts total nucleic acid and quantifies HIV RNA in copies per milliliter using the HIV-1 Test, v2.0 kit (Roche Diagnostics). For the measurement of cell-associated HIV RNA levels, cells were washed with PBS, counted, and lysed (Qiagen RLT buffer, 400 µl for every 2 million cells; Qiagen, Venlo, Netherlands). Lysates were filtered through a Qiashredder (Qiagen). Total RNA was prepared from the lysates (400 µl) using a robotic system (QIAsymphony, Qiagen) that incorporates a DNase I digestion step to eliminate cellular DNA. The resulting total RNA was eluted with 200 µl of buffer, diluted to 1 ml with nuclease-free water, and analyzed by COBAS using the HIV-1 Test v2.0 kit. Preparations of both cell-associated RNA and supernatant total nucleic acids were tested for potential contamination with HIV DNA and/or host DNA by performing the PCR amplification in the presence and absence of reverse transcriptase and by a detection of GAPDH-encoding host DNA sequence. These methods confirmed that there was no contaminating HIV DNA in either the intracellular RNA or supernatant total nucleic acid preparations (Supplementary Figs. S3 and S4).
For cell activation analysis, either complete PBMC cultures or resting CD4+ T cells isolated from HIV-infected cART-suppressed patients were incubated with the tested agents under specified conditions and were stained with relevant antibodies. All antibodies were purchased from BD Biosciences and included Alexa Fluor 700-labeled antibody to CD4, APC-H7-labeled antibody to CD8, PE-Cy7 -labeled antibody to CD19, PE-labeled antibody to CD69, APC-labeled antibody to CD25, and V450-labeled antibody to HLA-DR. Live cells were gated by forward and side scatter and exclusion of the dead cells by Live/Dead Fixable Aqua Stain (Invitrogen). Marker staining was assessed by flow cytometry analysis on a LSR Fortessa with data processing using FlowJo software.
Resting CD4 T cells obtained from HIV-infected patients on suppressive cART were incubated with serial dilutions of HDACi in 96-well plates at 10,000 cells/well for indicated time and then lysed by repeated freezing and thawing. Total cellular HDAC activity was measured using the HDAC-Glo I/II assay kit (Promega) according to the manufacturer's protocol.
Single-genome sequencing of a portion of HIV-1 gag-pro-pol amplified from cell culture supernatants or cellular DNA extracts was performed as previously described. Sequences were aligned using ClustalW and neighbor-joining phylogenetic analysis was performed using MEGA5. Trees were rooted on the subtype B consensus sequence (www.hiv.lanl.gov).
HIV RNA-induction experiments were conducted using 5 to 6 replicates for every experimental condition, including vehicle-treated controls. Fold induction in HIV RNA levels was calculated as a ratio of mean signals from compound-treated and vehicle (DMSO)-treated control samples from the same donor under identical conditions. Student's t-test (one-tailed distribution, two-sample equal variance) was used to assess statistical significance of the difference between the detected HIV RNA copies in vehicle control- and HDACi-treated samples or between RMD- and VOR-treated samples. Time course experiments testing the latency reversal agents had matching vehicle-treated controls for each time point. For experiments using blood-derived resting CD4 T cells, culture supernatants from 3 replicate wells were combined and analyzed using the COBAS system. Primary results in absolute HIV RNA copy numbers from all experiments presented in this study are provided in Supplementary material (Supplementary Table S4).