The study was approved by the Clinical Research Ethics Committee of Zhongshan Hospital of Fudan University (Shanghai, China). Written informed consent was obtained from all patients for use of those tissue samples in research.
Fresh tissue specimens from a series of 92 RCC patients who underwent resection in 2012 at Zhongshan Hospital of Fudan University were obtained for real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and Western blot analysis. The tissue samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately after resection and stored at 80°C until further analysis.
In addition, archived formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue specimens obtained from 115 consecutive cases of patients who had undergone radical nephrectomy or nephron-sparing surgery for unilateral, sporadic RCC in 2005 were obtained for immunohistochemistry analysis. None of the patients had received chemotherapy or radiotherapy before surgery. Tumor stage was determined according to the 2009 International Union Against Cancer TNM classification system. Tumor differentiation was graded using the Fuhrman classification system. The use of samples was approved by the Ethics Committee of Zhongshan Hospital. Documented informed consent was obtained from each patient prior to participation in this study.
Total RNA was extracted from 92 paired RCC samples and corresponding adjacent normal tissues by TRIzol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. cDNA was synthesized from total RNA (0.5 µg) in a total reaction volume of 10 µl using the PrimeScript RT reagent Kit (TaKaRa Bio, Shiga, Japan). The reaction mixture was incubated at 37°C for 15 min, heated briefly (10 s) at 85°C, and then cooled to 4°C. The following primer pairs were used for PCR: PROX1, 5-GGG AAG TGC AAT GCA GGA AG-3 (forward) and 5-GCA TCT GTT GAA CTT TAC GTC GG-3 (reverse); -Actin, 5-TCC CTG GAG AAG AGC TAC G-3 (forward) and 5-GTA GTT TCG TGG ATG CCA CA-3 (reverse). Real-time qRCR was conducted using SYBR Green dye in an M3000PTM Real Time PCR amplification system (Stratagene, TX, USA). qPCR mixtures contained 2 µl cDNA (synthesized as described above), 12.5 µl SYBR Green Master mix (TaKaRa), and 0.5 µl of each upstream and downstream primer in a total volume of 25 µl. The amplification conditions were 95°C for 30 s, followed by 30 cycles of 95°C for 5 s, 60°C for 15 s, and 72°C for 10 s. Relative expression levels of PROX1 were normalized to the geometric mean of -Actin (internal control). The data were analyzed using the comparative threshold cycle (2CT, CTŠ=ŠCTPROX1CT-Actin) method.
Sections (5 µm thick) were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated using a graded alcohol series. For antigen retrieval, the sections were heated in EDTA buffer (pH 9.0) for 20 min at 100°C. The tissue sections were then treated with 0.3% H2O2 for 5 min to block endogenous peroxidase activity and subsequently rinsed three times (2 min each) with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Rabbit anti-PROX1 antibody (Proteintech Group, CHI, USA) was used to detect PROX1 expression. The antibody was diluted 1100 in Tris-NaCl-blocking buffer (TNB) and incubated with the samples overnight at 4°C. After rinsing with PBS, tissue sections were incubated for 30 min with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated mouse anti-rabbit secondary antibody. The slides were washed with PBS again, and incubated with the chromogenic substrate 3,3-diaminobenzidine (DAB) to visualize the reaction. Finally, the sections were counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated, and mounted in Diatex. For negative immunostaining controls, the primary antibody was omitted. A hepatocellular carcinoma specimen was used as a positive control.
PROX1 expression was evaluated by two investigators blinded to clinicopathological information about the patients. Sections were considered to be positive when tumor cells showed cytoplasmic or nuclear PROX1 expression. Each tumor was given a score, obtained by multiplying the percentage of stained cells (0, 0%; 1, less than 25%; 2, 2550%; 3, more than 50%) by the staining intensity (0, no staining; 1, weak staining; 2, moderate staining; 3, strong staining). Total scores of 03 were designated low expression, and total scores of 49 were designated high expression.
Total protein of tissues and cells was obtained using RIPA lysis buffer (150 mM sodium chloride, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0)) containing a mixture of proteinase inhibitors. Protein concentration was determined using BCA protein assay reagent (Keygen, Nanjing, China). Equivalent amounts of proteins were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and then transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (Invitrogen). After blocking in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 5% fat-free milk, the membranes were incubated with primary anti-PROX1 (Upstate, NY, USA), anti-E-cadherin and anti-vimentin (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) antibodies at 4°C overnight, and then incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody at room temperature for 2 h. A -Actin antibody (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) was used as a control for equal loading. Blots were developed using an enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) system (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA), and signals were detected on X-ray film.
The human RCC cell lines 786-O, 769-P, ACHN and OS-RC-2, and the human renal proximal tubular epithelial cell line HKC were obtained from the Cell Bank of the Chinese Academy of Science (Shanghai, China). 786-O, 769-P and OS-RC-2 cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 (Gibco, Gran Island, NY, USA); ACHN and HKC cells were maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (Gibco). All media were supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco), penicillin (100 U/ml), and streptomycin (0.1 mg/ml), and cells were cultured in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% air at 37°C.
Plasmid constructs were prepared as described previously.
Expression plasmids were transfected into cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Recombinant lentiviruses were packaged by co-transfecting HEK293T cells with pLKO.1- or pWPI.1-based plasmids with the helper plasmids, pSPAX2 (Addgene plasmid 12260) and pMD2.G (Addgene plasmid 12259). Supernatants from co-transfections were used for infection of cultured cells. 786-O cells were infected with a PROX1-expressing lentivirus (Lenti-PROX1), and ACHN cells were infected with lentiviruses expressing small interfering RNA (siRNA) against PROX1 (Lenti-si259, Lenti-si1646) or scrambled control siRNA (Lenti-siSCR). After 24 h, the infection medium was replaced with the cell-appropriate growth medium. Infected cells were passaged after 4872 h.
Cell proliferation was measured using a CCK-8 kit (Dojindo, kumamoto, Japan). A total of 1103 cells infected with lentiviruses were seeded into 96-well plates in 100 µl of medium containing 10% FBS and incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2. After 24, 48, 72 and 96 h, the medium was replaced with 100 µl of fresh medium and 10 µl CCK-8 solution was added to each well. Cells were then incubated for 2 h at 37°C in 5% CO2, after which absorbance at 450 nm was measured using a microplate reader (Molecular Devices, CA, USA). Each experiment was performed in triplicate and repeated in quadruplicate for each condition.
786-O and ACHN cells infected with lentiviruses were seeded separately in six-well plates at a density of 1102 cells/well. After incubation at 37°C for 1014 d, cells were washed twice with PBS, stained with Giemsa solution (AppliChem, Darmstadt, German), and allowed to air dry at room temperature. The number of colonies containing more than 50 cells was microscopically counted, and colony-formation rate was calculated as the number of colonies/number of cells inoculated  100%. Each experiment was performed in triplicate.
For scratch-wound assays, 786-O and ACHN cells infected with lentiviruses were seeded in six-well plates and cultured until they reached 8090% confluence. The cell layer in each well was scratched using a sterile 200 µl pipette tip to create a cleared line. After washing three times with PBS, cells were incubated under standard conditions, and migration into the scratched area was photographed (10-fold magnification) 0, 24, and 48 h after wounding.
All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 17.0 for Windows (SPSS, Inc.). Qualitative variables were compared using Person's Ï2 test and Fisher's exact test, and quantitative variables were analyzed using Student's t test. Univariate analyses were calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method and were assessed using the log-rank test. Multivariate analysis was done using the Cox multivariate proportional hazards regression model. For in vitro experiments, individual culture dishes or wells were analyzed separately (i.e., no pooling of samples). Each experiment was repeated three times. Data are expressed as means  standard deviation (SD). A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used for comparisons of means. A probability value of p<0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.