This study was approved by Shanghai Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, Shanghai, China, and the Institutional Committee at the National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing (NIBS). Written consent was obtained from every patient who donated tissues.
All cases were reviewed by pathologists to confirm the stage of liver cancer (TNM system and BCLC system), tumor histology, and tumor content. The criteria for resection included the absence of distant metastasis or main portal vein thrombosis, an anatomically resectable disease, and an adequate liver function reserve, as assessed by liver biochemistry and indocyanine green retention after 15 minutes. None of the patients had received other therapies, including chemo-embolization or chemotherapy, before the tumor was resected. Serum HBsAg (hepatitis B virus surface antigen) and anti-HBs (hepatitis B virus surface antibody) levels were assayed using an enzyme immunoassay test (Abbott Laboratories, Chicago, IL, USA). A portion of each fresh sample was treated with the RNAlater reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) overnight at 4°C and was stored at -80°C until use; the remaining tissue samples were immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen after resection and store at -80°C.
Genomic DNA was extracted from the HCC tissues using the Tiangen DNA Mini Kit (Tiangen, Beijing, China), and mutation sites with the highest frequencies were selected according to the COSMIC website (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/genetics/CGP/cosmic/). Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the CSF1R, CTNNB1, KRAS, BRAF, NRAS, ERBB2, MET, PIK3CA, JAK1, and SMO genes with frequencies higher than 0.1% mutation in HCC (Table S2) were evaluated in all of the DNA samples using the SequenomMASSARRAY Service (CapitalBio, Beijing, China).
Among the HCC samples, four paired samples derived from HBV-positive patients that harbored the CTNNB1 mutation were selected for RNA-seq. Total RNA was extracted from these samples using Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The library was constructed by the Sequencing Center at NIBS. RNA single-end sequencing was performed using an Illumina GAII analyzer.
For the data analysis, 45-bp sequences called by the Illumina pipeline were mapped to the human genome (hg19) using Tophat (v2.0.4). Gene annotation and the calculation of FPKM (fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads) values were performed using Cufflinks (v2.0.2), with the provision of a GTF annotation file (hg19).
We have deposited our RNA-seq data in Gene expression omnibus, NCBI (accession number: 5048). It's now publicly available online with the following link: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?token=wdujaqwefhmdpcx&acc=GSE55048.
Differences in gene expression were assessed using Cuffdiff, with a false discovery rate correction for multiple testing. Genes with p-values 0.05 and a fold change ¥2 were considered differentially expressed.
To identify the overrepresented biological categories within each cluster, a Gene Ontology (GO) term analysis was applied. The percentage of the genes within each category in relation to the total amount of genes in each cluster was calculated, and hierarchical clustering was conducted to group the clusters according to their similarities in gene function representation.
M50 Super 8x TOPFlash reporter plasmid (kindly gifted by Dr. Wei Wu) and mutant -catenin (T41A) plasmids were transfected into 293T cells in 96-well plates using the Vigofect reagent (Vigorous Biotechnology, Beijing, China) according to the supplier's recommendations. The cells were harvested 3648 h post-transfection. Reporter assays were performed using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay with internal control of Renilla lucicerase plasmid (Promega, Madison, WI, USA, kindly gifted by Dr. Wei Wu) according to the manufacturer's protocol.
We selected 35 potential tumor suppressors from the list of downregulated genes in the RNA-seq dataset and cloned these genes into the pLIP lentiviral vector that contained a FLAG tag. Each vector was transfected into 293T cells, and a western blot analysis was used to verify the expression of the construct with anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma-Aldrich Co. LLC, St. Louis, MO USA). Lentiviruses were packaged in 293T cells following cotransfection with the pMD2.G and psPAX2 vectors, and the virus was stored at 80°C.
To determine the potential tumor-suppressive functions of these genes, we selected three cell lines, including HepG2, Huh7, Hep3B, from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA). All of the cells were grown in 384-well plates and were infected with 50-µl lentivirus encoding the potential tumor suppressor at 18 h after the cells had adhered to the dish. The virus was removed at 12 h post-infection, and the cells were allowed to grow for another 5 days. The relative cell number was detected using Cell Titer Glo (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Infection of each gene was repeated at least three times in triplicate form each time.
A KaplanMeier survival curve analysis was performed using the Prism software. For comparing effects of transcription factors on cell growth, student's t-tests were calculated with Excel version 2007 software (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA) using an unpaired two-tailed analysis. A P-value <0.05 (*) was considered statistically significant. A P-value <0.01 (**) was considered very statistically significant.