Mouse monoclonal antibody to human C3 (Abcam, MA), goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (Sigma, MO), purified human complement component C3 protein (Quidel, CA) were purchased.
Paired serum samples and liver biopsy specimens from 12 chronically HCV infected patients and 12 non-HCV liver disease patients were randomly selected for use in this study. Sera and liver samples were collected from subjects with their written consent, and the protocol was approved by the Saint Louis University Internal Review Board. The liver biopsy specimens were read by an experienced pathologist, and the severity of hepatitis was graded and staged according to a system described by Scheuer. Liver biopsy tissue specimens were embedded in optimum cutting temperature (OCT) formulation and preserved at 70°C. Sera were prepared after storing on ice within a short time (23 h) to retain complement activity, aliquoted, and stored at 70°C. Each aliquot was thawed and tested once for complement related activity. Commercially available control liver RNAs were procured (Clonetics, CA; Clonetech, CA; and Lonza, NJ).
Immortalized human hepatocytes (IHH) or human hepatoma cells were used to grow HCV genotype 1a, as previously described. Cell culture grown HCV released in culture supernatant was filtered through a 0.45 µm cellulose acetate membrane (Nalgene, NY), aliquoted, and stored at 70°C for single use. RNA (IU/ml) was quantified by real-time PCR (Prism7500 real-time thermocycler; ABI) with the use of HCV analyte-specific reagents (ASR, Abbott) in the Pathology Clinical Laboratory at Saint Louis University. Infectious virus titer from cell culture supernatant was also measured by fluorescence-focus forming unit (FFU) using a NS5A specific monoclonal antibody. For virus infection, hepatocytes were incubated with 0.5 moi of cell culture grown HCV. After virus adsorption for 8 h, cells were washed, incubated with fresh medium for 4 days, and used in subsequent experiment.
HCV infected patient sera were used for C3 convertase (USCNK, TX) and iC3b (Quidel, CA) analyses by a commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit following manufacturer's protocol.
50 µg/ml of C3 purified protein was incubated with an indicated dose of human sera at 37°C for 30 min. Samples were separated under reducing conditions by SDS-PAGE. Proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane and treated with anti-human C3 antibody at 4°C overnight, followed by a mouse secondary antibody. The experiment was carried out three times, and a representative figure is shown. Densitometry was analyzed using Image J software.
C3b deposition on gram-negative bacterial cell surface was performed similarly as described. Briefly, E. coli DH5 (1107) was incubated with HCV infected patient serum or normal human serum (NHS) (10% sera in a final volume of 50 µl) at 37°C for 30 min. Purified C3 protein (20 µg/ml) was added in the bacteria and serum mixture. After washing with PBS, opsonized log-phase bacteria were plated onto 96-well EIA plates at 5106 per well and adhered by dry desiccation. Nonspecific binding sites were blocked with 0.5% BSA in PBS and incubated for 30 min at 37°C. After washing, the plates were sequentially incubated at room temperature with C3 antibody for 60 min, HRP-conjugated secondary antibody for 30 min, and finally substrate solution for visualizing HRP activity. The reaction was stopped with H2SO4 and color intensity measured at OD490.
Amboceptor sensitized sheep erythrocytes (EA) were purchased (Complement Technologies, Tyler, TX). Erythrocytes (5108) were washed with dextrose gelatin veronal buffer (DGVB) buffer (2.5 mM veronal buffer, pH 7.3, 72 mM NaCl, 140 mM glucose, 0.1% gelatin, 1 mM MgCl2, and 0.15 mM CaCl2), EA suspensions were adjusted and lysed with 90 µl of water to have an absorbance value of 1.5 at 405 nm.
For assessment of convertase function, 10 µl of EA were placed in a 96-well V-shape microplate (Nunc) and 40 µl of DGVB buffer containing a 2.0% HCV patient or healthy control serum was added to assemble convertases. The plate was kept in an incubator shaker at 30°C with 300 rpm shaking for 5 minutes for convertase formation. To initiate complement mediated lysis from existing convertase complexes, 50 µl of 40 mM EDTA-GVB buffer (40 mM EDTA, 5 mM veronal buffer, 0.1% gelatin, 145 mM NaCl) containing 140 guinea pig serum as a source of complement was added and the plate was incubated for another 30 minutes at 37°C on a 300 rpm shaker. Alternatively, lysis was developed with guinea pig complement deficient in C4 in 40 mM EDTA-GVB buffer. Cells were pelleted and 50 µl of the supernatant containing hemoglobin released from lysed EA were measured at 405 nm in a microplate reader.
To assess the contribution of the alternative convertases as an amplification loop of the classical pathway, we blocked Factor B activity during and after convertase formation. EA were mixed with 40 µl DGVB containing serum at a final concentration of 2% and 60 µg/ml of function blocking mouse anti-human FB antibody (Quidel, SanDiego) or control antibody. C5 convertase was allowed to assemble as previously described. To initiate complement-mediated lysis, the same dilution of anti-Factor B antibody in 50 µl of DGVB was added and incubated in the presence of a 140 dilution of guinea pig complement. Cells were pelleted and supernatant containing hemoglobin released was measured at 405 nm.
C2, Factor I, or Factor H mRNA quantitation was performed by real-time PCR using specific primers and probes using a 7500 Fast Real Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems, CA). RNA was isolated from experimental samples using TRIzol (Invitrogen, CA), and cDNA was synthesized using random hexamers and a SuperScript III first-strand synthesis kit (Invitrogen).
Results were expressed as the mean  standard deviation (SD), and statistical analyses were performed using a two-tailed unpaired Student t test or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) in GraphPad Prism, version 5 (GraphPad, La Jolla, CA). A p values <0.05 was considered statistically significant.