The expression strain L. lactis NZ9000 (NIZO food research B.V., Netherlands) was propagated in M17 (Difco, NJ, USA) containing 0.5% (wt/vol) glucose at 30°C without shaking. Escherichia coli (E. coli) DH5 strains were grown in Luria-Bertani medium at 37°C under aeration. The expression vector pNZ8148 (NIZO food research B.V., Netherlands) used in L. lactis NZ9000 has a chloromycetin-resistance gene for selection. Antibiotics were used when appropriate at the following concentrations: 5 g/ml chloramphenicol and 50 g/ml ampicillin.
Total RNA was isolated form renal tissue of newborn Meishan piglets using the Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) method according to the manufacturers instructions. Reverse transcription and polymerase chain reactions (PCR) were carried out to amplify the mature pEGF (MPpEGF) sequence (GenBank: NM_214020.1, 2908..3066), using forward primers F1, F2, F3 and reverse primer R. The sequence of the primers were (Bold letters indicate the addition of restriction enzyme sites of NcoI and SacI): F1, 5-GCT GCA GCC CCG TTG TCA GGT GTT TAC GCT AAT AGT TAC TCT GAA TGC C-3; F2, 5-CA GCT ATT TTA ATG TCT ACA GTG ATA CTT TCT GCT GCA GCC CCG TTG TCA G-3; F3, 5-CAT GCC ATG GCT AAA AAA AAG ATT ATC TCA GCT ATT TTA ATG TCT AC-3 and R: 5-C GAG CTC TTA GCG CAG CTC CCA CCA TTT CAA G-3. The signal sequence of the major secreted protein Usp45 of L. lactis subsp. cremoris MG1363 was contained in the forward primers F1, F2, and F3 with a whole length of the 81 base pairs (GenBank EU382094.1). A unique high fidelity DNA polymerase PrimeSTARTM HS DNA Polymerase (TaKaRa, Osaka, Japan) was used in PCR. The PCR conditions were [98°C (10 sec), 55°C (5 sec), 72°C (1 min)] for 30 cycles. The primers amplified a 259-bp fragment contained 81-bp of SPUsp45 and 159-bp of MPpEGF. TaKaRa LA Taq (Takara, Osaka, Japan) was finally used to amplify the 259-bp DNA fragment with a 3-A for TA cloning with forward primer F3 and reverse primer R. The 259-bp fusion fragment was verified by 1.2% agarose gel electrophoresis and gel-purified by using an E.Z.N.A.„¢ Gel Extraction Kit and ligated into pMD19-T Simple Vector to generate pMD19-SPUsp45-MPpEGF. After transforming into E. coli DH5 competent cells, positive clones were identified by sequencing, and then pMD19-SPUsp45-MPpEGF was digested with NcoI and SacI to release the SPUsp45-MPpEGF insert. The purified insert was subsequently cloned into the corresponding site of expression vector pNZ8148 that was linearized with NcoI and SacI. The resultant construct, known as pNZ8148-SPUsp45-MPpEGF, had a sequence of SPUsp45-MPpEGF placed behind the inducible promoter PnisA on the plasmid (Figure 1). The expression construct was then transformed into E. coli MC1061; DNA sequencing confirmed the identity of the plasmid. Finally, the plasmid was transformed into L. lactis NZ9000 competent cell by electroporation. Recombinant L. lactis NZ9000/pNZ8148-SPUsp45-MPpEGF was amplified with primers F0 (F0: 5-ATAACGCGAGCATAATAAAC-3) and R and sequenced to select positive recombinant strains. The empty vector pNZ8148 was also transformed into L. lactis NZ9000 and was designated as a control (LL-EV).
According to the growth and induction condition for L. lactis optimized by NIZO, nisin induction of the recombinant L. lactis strain was performed as follows. From a culture grown overnight, a 4% (vol/vol) inoculum was transferred to fresh medium and bacteria were grown at 30°C until the optical density at 600 nm was 0.4. Nisin A (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) was added at a final concentration of 1 ng/ml, and L. lactis cells were propagated for 4 h to 24 h before harvesting.
Western blotting was performed as described. Proteins in cell lysates and supernatant fluids were separated on 15% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gels and then transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF; Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) membranes. The blots were blocked in skim milk-phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then incubated with primary anti-EGF (1:500 dilution; Cell Sciences, Canton, MA), followed by incubation with a secondary antibody (anti-rabbit IgG horseradish peroxidase-linked anti body, 1:2000; Cell Signaling Technology, MA, USA). Proteins were detected by the enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) Advance Western Blotting Detection Kit (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ, USA). Densitometric analyses of band intensities were performed using GeneTools (Syngene, Frederick, MD, USA). Each experiment was repeated at least three times.
A L929 mouse fibroblast cell line (ATCC Cat. No. CCL-1) was used in an in vitro cell proliferation assay. Cells were seeded in a 6-well culture plate at an initial density of 0.16105 cells/well with 2.5 ml Dulbeccos Modified Eagles Medium (DMEM) containing 100 IU/ml penicillin sodium, 100 g /ml streptomycin sulfate and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Cells were incubated at 37.0°C in 5% carbon dioxide until 60% confluent. Culture medium was removed and cells were washed 3 times with D-Hanks solution. Subsequently, the cells were incubated in DMEM for 24 h to achieve serum deprivation. Then cells were washed twice with D-Hanks and fresh DMEN medium without FBS and were used for further culture. Cells were treated immediately with the following groups: recombinant human EGF (rhEGF; Cell science; 20 ng/ml), supernatant fluid collected from 24 h nisin A induced L. lactis NZ9000/pNZ8148SPUsp45-MPpEGF (LL-pEGF; 10 or 20 l), and supernatant fluid collected from L. lactis NZ9000/pNZ8148 cultured at the same time as the control (LL-EV; 20 l). All the supernatants from the cultures were filtered by using 0.22-m sterile syringe filters before being added into the cell culture medium. After 24 h treatment, cells were trypsinized and quantified using a hemocytometer. Cell counting was done in a blinded-manner by a 3rd party that was not aware of the experimental treatment.
Forty-five crossbred piglets (DurocLandraceYorkshire) weaned at 21 days were obtained from New Hope Group (Chengdu, SC). After two days of transition feeding, 40 piglets were selected and assigned to 1 of the 4 treatment groups based on sex and body weight: control (M17 broth), antibiotic control (kitasamycin, 25 mg/kg diet), LL-EV (empty vector control, no pEGF was detected) and LL-pEGF (1.8 ug/ml pEGF, the concentration calculated based on the supernatant fluids and the L. lactis cell lysates), and each treatment had 10 replicates (5 males and 5 females). All the piglets were fed separately in a metabolic cage with a nipple waterer and a stainless steel feeder for a 14 d experimental period. The piglets were provided ad libitum access to water and diet. The basal diet represented a typical commercial corn-soybean meal that met the nutrient requirements suggested by the National Research Council (1998). The diets (Table 1) did not contain any feed antibiotics except for the diet used for piglets in antibiotic control group. Piglets were reared in an environmentally regulated nursery house in Sichuan Agricultural University. Food intake of each piglet was recorded every day and bodyweight was recorded every 7 d. The study was conducted according to the guidelines from the Chinese Council of Animal Care and was approved by the Sichuan Agricultural University Animal Care Committee and all in vivo experiments in accordance with the ARRIVE guidelines.
LL-pEGF was induced for 24 h as described above, and at the same time LL-EV was harvested and used for the treatments of LL-pEGF and LL-EV. Bacterial cultures were delivered to piglets as a whole-cell suspension. All the piglets were orally fed 50-ml doses, via intragastric gavage, twice daily through a human use stomach tube at 08:00 and 15:00. The piglets in the treatment of control were orally administrated 50-ml sterile M17 broth, and the piglets in the antibiotic control treatment were fed with 50-ml physiological saline in the same manner to create the same stress produced by gavage with other treatments.
At the end of the experiment, randomly selected six piglets (3 males and 3 females) from each treatment were anaesthetized with an intravenous injection of sodium pentobarbital [25 mg/kg body weight (BW)] and bled by exsanguinations. The piglet abdomen was opened immediately from the sternum to the pubis; the entire intestine was rapidly removed. A 15 cm section of distal duodenum, mid-jejunum and mid-ileum were ligated and removed to avoid chyme admixture in different intestinal sections. The small intestine was placed on a chilled stainless steel tray. A small incision was opened in the distal end of each segment, and the chyme was collected in a 5 ml tube and stored at 4°C. Two segments of 2 cm and 10 cm were cut at the distal duodenum, mid-jejunum and mid-ileum. The 2 cm intestinal segments were flushed gently with ice-cold PBS (pH 7.4) and then placed in 10% fresh, chilled formalin solution for histological measurement. Intestinal segments (10 cm in length) were opened longitudinally and the contents were flushed with ice-cold PBS. Mucosa was collected with scraping on a sterile glass microscope slide, which was placed on an ice-cold tray, rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until analysis. Intestinal sections used for histological measurement or mucosa collection were sampled at the same location of each piglet. All samples were collected within 20 min after being killed.
Formalin-fixed duodenum, jejunum and ileum samples were embedded in paraffin. Cross sections of the segments were cut with a microtome to be approximately 5-m thick and were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. At least 4 sections of each of the small intestinal segments were checked, and more than 6 complete villous-crypt structures were examined under a microscope in each section. The villus height and the associated crypt depth were measured using a microscope with a Leica Q500MC computer-assisted morphometric system. Villus height was defined as the distance from the villus tip to the crypt mouth, and crypt depth from the crypt mouth to the base.
The enzymes studied were lactase (EC 3.2.1.23), sucrase (EC 3.2.1.48), maltase (EC 3.2.1.20), aminopeptidase A (EC 3.4.11.1), aminopeptidase N (EC 3.4.11.2) and dipeptidyl peptidase IV (EC 3.4.14.5). All assays were carried out on homogenates of mucosal tissue obtained by thawing approximately 1 g of tissue and homogenizing it in 9 ml PBS (pH=7.2) using an ultrasonic homogenizer. The sample was stored at -80°C before being assayed. Lactase, sucrase and maltase activities were assayed as described by Petersen et al.. The protein content in mucosal homogenates was measured according to Lowry et al., using bovine serum albumin (A 7638, Sigma Chemical, St. Louis) as the standard.
A porcine aminopeptidase A (APA) ELISA Kit (R&D Systems Inc., MN, USA), porcine aminopeptidase N (APN) ELISA Kit (R&D Systems Inc., MN, USA) and porcine dipeptidase IV (DPP-IV) ELISA Kit (R&D Systems Inc., MN, USA) were used for quantitative detection of APA, APN and DPP-IV. Enzymes were first combined to the solid-phase antibody, and then the combined antibody, which was labeled with horseradish peroxidase (HRP) to form an antibody-antigen-enzyme-antibody complex. 3,3,5,5-Tetramethylbenzidine (TMB), was used as substrate to be enzyme-catalyzed by HRP. The reaction was terminated by addition of a sulphuric acid solution and measured spectrophotometrically at a wavelength of 450 nm. The enzyme activities were expressed as units per milligram or nanogram per gram of mucosa.
The microbiological assay of ileum and cecum digesta was carried out according to the procedure of Torrallardona et al.. The digesta collected from the ileum and cecum was homogenized in a sterile salt solution (NaCl 0.85%). Bacterial quantifications for homogenized liquid were made using serial 10 fold dilutions in the sterile salt solution (NaCl 0.85%), followed by plating on an agar medium. The samples of ileal and cecal digesta were cultured in different media for the determination of E. coli (MacConkey agar; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), Enterococcus (EC agar; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), Bifidobacterium (BL agar; Difco, NJ, USA) and Lactobacillus (MRS agar; Oxoid, Hampshire, UK). The concentration of bacteria in the original sample was calculated as the mean of three dilutions for each sample. The results are expressed as the mean of log10 colony forming units (cfu)/g digesta from the 6 piglets with the standard deviations.
Western blot and in vitro cell proliferation assays were repeated at least three times, with data representing the mean values with standard deviations of all repeats within an individual experiment. For the animal trial, the experimental model used was a completely randomised design with four treatments and the individual piglets were the experimental units, with data representing the mean values with their standard deviations of all experimental units. Data were analyzed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by either the Bonferroni test for selected pair comparisons [Table 2, final weight, average daily gain (ADG) of second week, average daily feed intake (ADFI) of first week and overall period; Figure 2A (II), the Enterococcus quantification; Figure 2B [I], the E. coli quantification], or the Tukey test for multiple comparisons (all other tables and figures) for ANOVA to determine statistical differences between groups using GraphPad Prism analysis software. Results were considered significant at P<0.05.