The clinical trial protocol (NCT00017563) was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the Oregon Health & Science University, Portland VA Medical Center, Kaiser Permanente Northwest Region, Legacy Health System, and the University of Washington. All patients signed informed consent. All mouse studies were approved by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center (FHCRC) Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) and performed in accordance with the approved protocols.
Fifty-seven patients with high-risk localized prostate cancer (defined as TNM>cT2b or T3a or PSA¥15 ng/ml or Gleason grade ¥4+3) were recruited between 2001 and 2004 for a phase I-II clinical trial of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The design of this clinical trial has been previously described. The trial identifier is NCT00017563.
Details of the tissue collection and gene expression profiling have been previously described in detail. Briefly, transrectal ultrasound-guided needle biopsies were obtained from each patient at study entry and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to chemotherapy. At radical prostatectomy, cancer-containing tissue samples were snap frozen immediately after prostate removal. Benign and neoplastic epithelial cells were separately acquired by laser-capture microdissection (LCM) using an Arcturus PixCell IIe microscope (Arcturus, Mountain View, CA). Total RNA was extracted from captured epithelium using a Picopure RNA isolation kit according to the manufacturer's instructions (Arcturus Inc., Mountain View, CA), and amplified using the messageAMP aRNA kit (Ambion, Austin, TX). Labeled cDNA probes were hybridized in a head-to-head fashion, pre-chemotherapy versus post-chemotherapy simultaneously to cDNA microarrays as we have previously described.
cDNA was synthesized from 1 µg amplified RNA (aRNA) from paired pre- vs. post-treated patient samples, or 1 µg RNA extracted from cultured cells, using 2 µg random hexamers for priming reverse transcription by SuperScript II (200 U per reaction; Invitrogen). Quantitative reverse transcription real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) reactions were done in duplicate, using approximately 5 ng of cDNA, 0.2 µM of each primer, and SYBR Green PCR master mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) in a 20 µl reaction volume and analyzed using an Applied Biosystems 7700 sequence detector. Samples were normalized to the cycle threshold value obtained during the exponential amplification of GAPDH. Control reactions with RNA or water as template did not produce significant amplification products. The sequences of primers used in this study were: GAPDH forward, 5-CCTCAACGACCACTTTGTCA-3; GAPDH reverse, 5-TTACTCCTTGGAGGCCATGT-3; MAOA forward, 5-AAAGTGGAGCGGCTACATGG-3; MAOA reverse, 5-CAGAAACAGAGGGCAGGTTCC-3; pleiotrophin (PTN) forward: 5-GGGCAGCAATTTAAATGTTATGACTA-3; PTN reverse: 5-ACCCCCATTTTGCTGACTACATT-3.
The androgen responsive prostate cancer cell line, LNCaP and androgen insensitive prostate cancer cell line PC3 (both from the American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, VA) were grown in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum and 100 IU/ml penicillin (Invitrogen Corp, Carlsbad, CA). The MAOA specific inhibitor, N-Methyl-N-propargyl-3-(2,4-dichlorophenoxy) propylamine hydrochloride (clorgyline), was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO). Docetaxel (provided by Sanofi-Aventis, Bridgewater, NJ) was diluted in 70% ethanol and used at 1 nM, 10 nM, and 100 nM concentrations for LNCaP cells and 50 nM and 200 nM for PC3 cells. For HIF1a expression studies, VCaP cells were grown in DMEM-F12 with 10% FBS. The MAOA specific inhibitor clorgyline (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO) was diluted in 70% ethanol and used at 1 µM concentration. Total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). cDNA was synthesized using the SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase kit (Invitrogen Corp, Carlsbad, CA). qRT-PCR reactions were done in triplicate, using SYBR Green master mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and analyzed using an Applied Biosystems 7700 sequence detector. Samples were normalized to the expression level of GAPDH.
The full-length human MAOA cDNA was amplified from human placenta cDNA using the pair of primers, huMAOA_BstUI_170: GTCCGCGAAAGCATGGAG and huMAOA_EcoRI_1788: GCAGAGAGCATAAGAATTCAACTTCA. The amplification products were first cloned into pCR2.1 and then subcloned into the retro-viral vector pBABE-puro using BstU I and EcoR I sites. pBABE-puro-MAOA as well as the empty vector pBABE-puro were transfected into phoenix retro-viral packaging cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen Corp, Carlsbad, CA). The medium containing retrovirus expressing the vectors was collected and used to infect PC-3 cells followed by puromycin selection and confirmation of MAOA overexpression by both RT-PCR and western blot.
Cell proliferation was assessed using the MTS dye reduction assay (Promega Corp, Madison, WI). Briefly, 10 µl of MTS reagent was added to each well of the 96-well plate and incubated at 37°C for 60 min. The color change was assessed by measuring the absorbance value of each well at 450 nm with an ELx808 BioTek absorbance microplate reader (BioTek Instruments, Winooski, VT). The Apo-One Caspase-3/7 assay (Promega Corp, Madison, WI) was used to assess apoptosis as per the manufacturer's instructions.
MAO enzyme activity was assessed using the MAO-Glo assay (Promega Corp, Madison, WI). Cells were lysed using a passive lysis buffer (Promega Corp, Madison, WI) and a luminogenic MAOA substrate was added to the lysate to yield methyl ester luciferin. After incubating at room temperature for one hour, a detection reagent reconstituted from esterase and luciferase enzymes was added to each well and the luminescence was measured using a Berthold L9505 BioLumat microplate luminometer (Berthold Technologies, Oak Ridge, TN).
ROS was detected by CM-H2DCFDA (Invitrogen Corp, Carlsbad, CA). Cells were trypsinized and washed with PBS, incubated either with 10 µM of DCFDA in PBS or with PBS as a negative control at 37C for 30 min, washed with PBS and returned to media for a 30 min recovery period at 37C. Fluorescent cells in 105 cells were counted by flow cytometry. Mean fluorescence intensity was used as a measurement of ROS. The assay was done in a triplicate.
Whole cell lysates were prepared using RIPA buffer (25 mM Tris pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) with added protease inhibitors (Roche, Indianapolis, IN). Nuclear protein extracts were prepared using the Nuclear/Cytosol Fractionation Kit protocol (Biovision, Mountain View, CA). Thirty micrograms of protein were subjected to electrophoresis for 45 min at 200 V on a SDS polyacrylamide gel and transferred to a PVDF filter. The filters were blocked with 3% BSA for 1 h and then incubated overnight with anti-MAOA polyclonal antibody, anti- NFkB (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), anti-HIF-1 (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ), or with anti--actin goat antibody (Promega Corp, Madison, WI). The filters were then incubated with species appropriate horseradish peroxidase labeled secondary antibodies (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). Immuno blots were visualized using SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL).
Mouse xenograft models were generated via subcutaneous injections into the right flank of 810 week old male CB17 SCID mice (Taconic, Hudson, NY). Specifically, subcutaneous xenografts were derived utilizing either PC3 cells engineered to stably overexpress MAOA or empty vector controls. Prior to injection cells were grown to 90% confluence, washed once with PBS and resuspended in ice-cold PBS. Animals were anesthetized and 106 cells were implanted subcutaneously in 200 microliters of 11 PBS:Matrigel solution. Once tumors were established, mice were dosed with 5 mg/kg docetaxel weekly by IP injection. For both treatment arms (MAOA and Control) 12 xenografts were generated and tumor growth was monitored for a period of 4 weeks post injection at which point tumors were excised and snap frozen. Tumor measurements and animal weights were assessed three times weekly and weekly, respectively. Total tumor volumes were calculated with the following formula: (.5236)(L1)(L2)2, where L1 represents the long axis and L2 the short axis of the tumor. Total RNA was extracted from frozen tumor sections using the RNeasy Mini RNA isolation kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) according to the manufactures protocol and further amplified to incorporate amino-allyl UTP using the MessageAmp II aRNA Kit (Ambion, Austin, TX). Samples were labeled and subsequently hybridized to Agilent 44K whole human genome expression arrays following the manufacturer's protocol (Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA). Data were processed using the Agilent Feature Extraction software, normalized, and filtered to remove probes with average intensity levels of <300. Resulting data were analyzed using the Statistical Analysis of Microarray (SAM) program, setting the significance threshold at a q-value of <0.5.
In order to identify genes whose expression was significantly related to biochemical (PSA) relapse free survival, gene expression profiles were analyzed for associations with biochemical relapse (http://linus.nci.nih.gov/BRB-ArrayTools.html). Briefly, we computed a statistical significance level for each gene related to biochemical relapse-free survival based on univariate proportional hazards models. Significant gene lists were determined by a threshold of p<0.01. The association of expression change of MAOA and time to PSA relapse was analyzed using a Cox proportional hazards model (Stata 8.0, Texus). Multivariate models included age, clinical stage, pathology Gleason grade, baseline PSA level, and post-chemotherapy MAOA expression change. The final model only included factors meeting a significance threshold of p<0.1. The statistical significance of assays of MAOA activity, cell proliferation, and apoptosis was evaluated using a Student's t test for 2-group comparisons. A value of p<0.05 was considered to be significant. The Statistical Analysis of Microarray (SAM) program was used to analyze expression differences between control and MAOA transcript profiles using unpaired, two-sample t tests and controlled for multiple testing by estimation of q-values using the false discovery rate (FDR) method. To determine the association between MAOA and HIF1 changes following chemotherapy Pearson correlations were utilized. Finally, the statistical significance of data generated in the xenograft experiments were evaluated with the Proc GLM (General Linear Model) procedure in SAS (Cary, NC) utilizing a significance threshold of p<0.05.