Fifty infertile couples who underwent IVF/intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) between June 2012 and November 2013 at the Infertility Center of Tehran Women General Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, were included in this study. They were in good physical and mental conditions. We included the women that had undergone IVF treatment because of male factor, tubal factor, or unexplained infertility. These women did not have ovulatory dysfunction, were aged 40 years, and had a normal baseline follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) (<10 mIU/mL).
The women underwent controlled ovarian stimulation with either the GnRH-a long protocol (n=26) or the GnRH-ant fixed multi-dose protocol (n=24), which was randomly assigned by the statistician.
The mean age (SD) of the participants was 31.7 (5.7) years. In the GnRH-a long protocol group (n=26), the treatment started by administering oral contraception pill (OCP) on the 2nd or the 3rd day of the pervious menstrual cycle. The daily administration of Buserelin acetate 500 g (Suprefact, Aventis, Germany) was started preceding the IVF cycle from day 21 until pituitary down-regulation (serum E2<50 pg/ml in the absence of follicular structures larger than 10 mm). The Buserelin dose was reduced to 250 g/d until the day of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) injection when pituitary down-regulation was achieved.
In the GnRH-ant fixed multi-dose protocol group (n=24), Cetrorelix acetate 0.25 mg/day (Cetrotide, Serono, Switzerland) was initiated on the sixth day of the gonadotropin stimulation.
Ovarian stimulation was started on the 3rd day of the current menstrual cycle by injection of rFSH Follitropin alfa (Gonal F, Serono, Italy) at a daily dose of 150 to 225 IU in each group.
Administration of Buserelin and Cetrorelix was continued until hCG was injected. When at least 3 follicles with a mean diameter of 17 mm were developed (evaluated by transvaginal sonography), hCG 5000 IU/2/IM (Choriomon, IBSA Institut Biochimique S.A., Switzerland) was injected. About 3436 h later, ultrasound-guided transvaginal oocyte retrieval was performed. One hundred morphologically normal germinal vesicle oocytes were donated by 50 healthy women with normal ovarian reserve functions. The oocytes were aspirated transvaginally after COS. All the women had mature oocytes for ICSI, but they donated immature ones to our study. We obtained 50 germinal vesicle oocytes from 26 women aged 30.45.5 years in the GnRH-a long protocol group and 50 germinal vesicle oocytes from 24 women aged 33.85.6 years in the GnRH-ant protocol group. The oocytes were collected in a Quinns Advantage Medium with HEPES (Sage, USA) supplemented with 20 % human serum albumin and then granulosa cells were removed from oocytes using mechanical and chemical (Hyaluronidase type 4, Sigma Aldrich, USA) methods.
After stripping off granulosa cells, we used an inverted microscope (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) to monitor the maturity of the oocytes.
In the COS cycles, immature oocytes constitute up to 10-15 % of the retrieved oocytes. Germinal vesicle (GV) oocytes are immature oocytes whose maturation process have been stopped in the prophase of the first meiotic stage and are characterized by enlarged nucleus and absent of polar body. Germinal vesicle oocytes were individually transferred into RNase-free micro centrifuge tubes. Then, 30 l of RLT buffer (Ambion, Austin, USA) was added to them. All samples were kept in a refrigerator at a temperature of 80°C until the time of the analysis. After the sampling, the pools of 50 germinal vesicle oocytes from the GnRH-a long protocol group and 50 germinal vesicle oocytes from the GnRH-ant protocol group were separately analyzed by qPCR.
ALLELEID 6.0 software was used for designing Exon-Junction primers. Molecular evolutionary genetics analysis (MEGA 4) software was also used for conducting sequence alignment. Oligo 6 Software was employed for the final assessment (Temperature/ Formation/False priming sites). Finally, we assessed primers in NCBI BLAST, as presented in Table 1.
Before isolating the RNA, the germinal vesicle oocytes were thawed within RLT buffer at room temperature and then pooled. To separate the RTL buffer from the pooled oocytes, they were then centrifuged at 12000 g for 3 minutes in order to extract total RNA, based on the standard protocol suggested by the manufacturer (Trizol, Invitrogen, USA). In order to remove genomic DNA contamination from the samples, the total RNA obtained from both groups was treated with DNase I (Fermentas, Sanktleon-rot, Germany). The total RNA concentration of the pooled germinal vesicle oocytes after treatment was 594 g/ml for the GnRH-a long protocol group and 672 g/ml for the GnRH-ant protocol group, determined by a Thermo Scientific Nano Drop 2000 Spectrophotometer. cDNA was synthesized according to manufacturer's instructions (Fermentas, Sanktleon-rot, Germany) using random hexamer primers.
We performed qPCR on the cDNA obtained from the pooled of germinal vesicle oocytes. Relative gene expression was calculated as the abundance ratio of each target gene to -actin.
Quantitative real time PCR reactions were conducted in duplicates using a Roto- Gene Q instrument (Qiagen, German) with SYBR Premix Ex Taq„¢ II master mix according to the procedure suggested by the manufacturer's instructions (Takara, Japan). The protocol for qPCR was initiated with a denaturizing step at 95°C for 30 seconds, followed by 50 cycles of 2-step, real-time PCR under the following conditions: 5 seconds at 95°C for denaturation and 30 seconds at 5960°C for annealing and extension.
No template control (NTC) was used as the negative control. The specificity of the PCR fragments was determined using melting curve analysis. All melting curves produced one peak for each of the PCR products.
The present study was approved by the ethics committee of Tehran University of Medical Sciences. The study was completely explained to the women, and informed consent was obtained before collecting germinal vesicles oocytes. The study was formally registered with the following code: IRCT 2014031112307 N3.
We used One-way ANOVA to compare quantitative variables between the two groups and chi-square for qualitative variables by SPSS version 16 (Chicago, IL, USA). The significance level was set at 0.05. The efficiency values given by the Linreg software and relative expression were calculated using the REST 2009 software (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), which is a standalone software tool used for estimating up and down regulation for gene expression studies. The CT was obtained by finding the difference between the groups. The fold change was calculated as FC=2-CT. For this purpose, .actin was used as the reference gene for expression normalization.