This study was performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the Dutch Medical Research Involving Human Subjects Act. Prior to the study, we obtained approval from the local ethics committee (Commissie Mensgebonden Onderzoek regio Arnhem-Nijmegen, April 20th 2010) as well as written informed consent from all participants. This clinical study was registered with The Netherlands National Trial Register (number NTR2605) shortly after recruitment began due to an administrative error. The authors confirm that all ongoing and related trials for this drug/intervention are registered. The protocol for this trial and supporting TREND checklist are available as supporting infromation (Protocol S1 and Checklist S1). The study participants were enrolled in EUGENDA (www.eugenda.org), a multicenter database for the clinical and molecular analysis of AMD, between March 2006 and August 2009. Patients with various stages of AMD were selected at random from the EUGENDA database and were included between June 2010 and February 2011. Follow-up ranged between 14 and 22 months. All data were collected at the department of Ophthalmology of the Radboud university medical center. We excluded individuals who had a core body temperature above 38°C and/or received antibiotics at baseline. In addition, we excluded patients who were receiving intraocular anti-angiogenic treatment, individuals with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome or membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis type 2 and patients who received local or systemic steroid therapy within the three months prior to the trial. A total of 72 AMD patients were included in this study (Figure 1).
To study the effect of zinc on complement activation in patients with AMD, 72 AMD patients received a daily oral supplement containing 50 mg zinc sulphate and 1 mg cupric sulphate in capsule form. The capsules were to be taken at home for a period of three months. These components were donated by Sanmed, Almere, the Netherlands. The 50 mg dose of zinc was lower than in the original AREDS formulation and was chosen to minimize the chance of side-effects. Also, we chose zinc sulphate instead of zinc oxide (as used in the AREDS study), because most over-the-counter supplements contain zinc sulphate and in addition there is evidence that the bioavailability may be higher. The primary endpoint of the study was a change in serum complement catabolism during the three months of zinc supplementation. AMD patients have increased serum levels of C3 and the metabolic byproduct C3d, the most prominent marker of chronic activation of the alternative complement pathway. To correct for individual variations in the level of C3, complement activation was defined as the C3d/C3 ratio as described previously. Anaphylatoxin C5a levels are also elevated in AMD patients and promote choroidal neovascularization. In order to explore downstream inhibitory effects of zinc on complement catabolism, we additionally measured serum C5a levels during the study period. The second objective was to study the association of serum complement catabolism during zinc administration and genotypes of AMD risk variants in CFH or ARMS2. 
During the course of the study, six venous blood samples were collected. One sample was collected prior to zinc supplementation and served as the baseline sample. Three samples were collected at the end of months 1, 2 and 3 of the three-month period of zinc supplementation. We collected a fifth blood sample two months after ending the zinc administration (i.e., at the end of month 5) to check for any reversible effects on complement activation. A final blood sample was collected in months 1422. From one month prior to zinc supplementation through the end of month 5, the patients were prohibited to take any type of nutritional supplement; from month 5 onwards, the patients were free to take supplements at their own discretion.
To identify clinical manifestations associated with intermittent infections, at every visit, we performed a general physical examination, measured the serum C-reactive protein (CRP) levels and administered a questionnaire that was aimed at identifying clinical manifestations associated with intermittent infections. At every visit, patients were asked whether they had been taking the zinc supplements daily to promote compliance. We also assessed the best-corrected visual acuity using Early-Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) charts at every visit. In addition, we imaged the retinas using high-resolution spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) to detect active neovascular manifestation of AMD. We performed color fundus photography at baseline to assist in AMD grading based on the 5-grade Clinical Age-Related Maculopathy Staging (CARMS) classification scale.
Serum was prepared by coagulation at room temperature and after centrifugation the samples were stored at 80°C within one hour after collection. C3 and C3d were measured in serum samples as described. All C3 and C3d measurements in this study were performed in a single experiment, except for the final sample in months 1422. C5a was measured by ELISA at a 1/10 dilution using a commercially available development kit (DuoSet) for human complement component C5a (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, USA). All the samples collected at baseline to month 5 were measured in a single run.
The CFH (Y402H; rs1061170) and ARMS2 (A69S; rs10490924) SNPs were genotyped as described. Serum zinc concentration was measured by atomic absorption spectroscopy with the spectrophotometer 1100 B from Perkin Elmer. CRP levels were measured by Abbott Architect C16000 system. The immunoturbidimetric test for CRP was provided by Abbott Diagnostics (Abbott Diagnostics).
We designed in vitro experiments to provide evidence of a direct effect of zinc on the complement pathway. Human serum was prepared from blood of several healthy volunteers after written informed consent had been obtained with the specific permit (418/2008) from the ethics committee of Lund University. Commercially available rabbit erythrocytes (H¥tunalab, Bro, Sweden) were washed in 2.5 mM veronal buffer pH 7.3, supplemented with 70 mM NaCl, 140 mM glucose, 0.1% porcine gelatin and 7 mM MgCl2. Different concentrations (064 µM) of zinc sulphate (Merck) were pre-incubated with 2% serum in the same buffer for 1.5 h at 37°C, followed by 1 h incubation at 37°C together with the erythrocytes. The amount of lysed erythrocytes was determined from the amount of released hemoglobin at 405 nm using Cary 50 MPR microplate reader (Varian).
To study the effect of zinc on membrane MAC deposition on human RPE cells subjected to oxidative stress, RPE cells (ARPE-19, ATCC) were cultured in DMEM/F12 media (HyClone), supplemented with 10% FCS (Gibco) and antibiotics (HyClone). After detachment using trypsin, the cells were incubated in medium containing 10 mM H2O2 for 2 h at 37°C, to mimic oxidative damage and make them amenable to attack from complement. After washing with PBS, the cells were incubated with 5% human serum, together with 0250 µM zinc sulphate, in the veronal buffer defined above, for 1 h at 37°C. The amount of MAC deposited on the RPE cells was detected using a monoclonal C9 neoepitope antibody (aE11, Hycult), which only recognizes C9 in the C5b-9 complex, followed by a FITC-conjugated secondary antibody and flow cytometric analysis (Partec).
A sample size of 70 was calculated to detect a decrease in serum C3d/C3 of 10% after 3 months, using the complement levels from a previous study to estimate variation, with Š=Š0.05 and a power of 80%.
Change in serum zinc, change in C3d/C3 ratio and change in C5a over the entire study period (0 to 1422 months) were all modeled separately. Changes in serum zinc concentration were analyzed using a linear mixed-effects model with zinc concentration as the dependent variable. To make optimal use of repeated measures and to allow for correction of baseline differences, changes in C3d/C3 and C5a levels level were analyzed using linear mixed-effects models with C3d/C3 ratio or C5a as the dependent variable. The interaction between time and baseline complement levels was included in a linear mixed-effects model to study any baseline effects. To illustrate the effect of the baseline C3d/C3 ratio we plotted the course of the C3d/C3 ratio for 3 groups with different baseline ratios using the raw data. In a recent study we measured C3d/C3 levels in 150 unaffected control subjects of 65 years and older, and we used the mean value (1.5) and standard deviation (0.6) to determine the cut-off points. The cut-off values for the different groups were selected by taking the mean C3d/C3 ratio and one standard deviation above and below the mean of the healthy control group. Our population was not large enough to create groups of individuals with two standard deviations above and below the mean. This resulted in the following three groups: 1. patients with baseline ratio ¥2.1 (nŠ=Š16); 2. patients with ratios between 1.52.1 (nŠ=Š29); and 3. patients with ratio <1.5 (nŠ=Š31). Only very few subjects (nŠ=Š3) had a baseline ratio more than one standard deviation below the mean, so these individuals were included in group 3. The associations between the complement levels throughout the study and CFH and ARMS2 genotype, age, gender, CRP level and zinc level were also studied using a linear mixed-effects model. In the final models for the change in zinc, C3d/C3 and C5a, only significant predictors were used (p<0.05). For the final serum zinc and C5a models this meant the inclusion of time and baseline values as the independent variables. In the final C3d/C3 model the independent variables were time, baseline C3d/C3 and the interaction between time and baseline C3d/C3.
To further explore the relationship between baseline complement catabolism and other patient characteristics at baseline, we assessed the associations of age and baseline visual acuity with baseline C3d/C3 ratio and C5a using the Pearson correlation and the Spearmans rank correlation coefficient. The difference in baseline complement catabolism between different genotypes was assessed using one-way ANOVA.
Because patients often display different stages of AMD in each eye, we created five groups for both eyes. These groups were based on the CARMS classification as follows: (CARMS grade 22), small drusen and/or RPE changes in both eyes; (CARMS grade 33), large drusen and/or drusenoid RPE detachment in both eyes; (CARMS grade 2:45), small drusen and/or RPE changes in one eye and geographic atrophy or choroidal neovascularisation in the other eye; (CARMS grade 345), large drusen and/or drusenoid RPE detachment in one eye and geographic atrophy or choroidal neovascularisation in the other eye; and (CARMS grade 4545), geographic atrophy or choroidal neovascularisation in both eyes. The association between baseline systemic complement catabolism and CARMS classification was tested using one-way ANOVA with a post-hoc Bonferroni correction. The correlation between baseline visual acuity and CARMS was tested using the Spearmans rank correlation coefficient.
Visual acuity changes during the course of the study were assessed by generalized estimated equations (GEE). The GEE model estimated the probability of low vision (LogMAR <0.5) versus high vision (LogMAR >0.5), with time and baseline C3d/C3 ratio as predictors. Data for the hemolytic assay and the RPE cell assay were analyzed using one-way ANOVA with Dunnetts multiple comparison test.
Reported p-values are two-sided, and differences were considered to be statistically significant if lower than 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS, version 18.0.