Fresh tissue specimens from a series of 30 ccRCC patients who underwent resection in 2012 were obtained for real-time quantitative PCR and immunohistochemistry analysis. The tissue samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately after resection and stored at -80°C until further analysis was performed.
In addition, archived formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue specimens derived from 267 consecutive cases of patients who had undergone radical nephrectomy or nephron-sparing surgery for unilateral, sporadic ccRCC from Jan. 2002 to Dec. 2005 at East Hospital of TongJi University were obtained, the matched peritumoral and tumor tissues were used to construct a tissue microarray for immunohistochemistry analysis. None of the patients had received chemotherapy or radiotherapy before surgery. After explaining the details of the study, potential benefits and risks associated with it, written informed consent was obtained from each included patient.
All of these patients agreed to participate in the study and gave written informed consent. Both this study and consent were approved by the the Ethics Committee of East Hospital and complied with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Flag-tagged full-length UBE3C cDNAs were cloned in pcDNA3 (Invitrogen) to create pFlag-UBE3C. Lentiviral vectors pLKO.1 TRC (Addgene plasmid 10879) and pWPI.1 (Addgene plasmid 12254) were used for producing recombinant lentiviruses. For RNA interference of UBE3C, DNA fragments encoding hairpin precursors for shUBE3C (5-GCCAGACATTACTACTTCCTA-3) was inserted into pLKO.1 TRC. A scrambled siRNA precursor (Scr) of similar GC-content to shUBE3C but no sequence identity with UBE3C was used as negative control. For overexpression of UBE3C, Flag-tagged UBE3C cDNA was cloned in pWPI.1.
Human RCC cell lines 786-O and ACHN were from Cell Bank of Shanghai Institutes of Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Cells were maintained in Dulbeccos modified Eagle medium (DMEM) (Invitrogen) supplemented with 100 U/ml penicillin G/streptomycin sulfate and 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen), and cultured at 37°C with 5% CO2.
The expression plasmids were transfected into cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturers instructions.Helper plasmids pSPAX2 (Addgene plasmid 12260) and pMD2.G (Addgene plasmid 12259) were co-transfected with pLKO.1- or pWPI.1-based plasmids into HEK293T cells to package recombinant lentiviruses. Supernatants from co-transfections were used for infection of cultured cells.
Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen), and reverse transcription was performed using PrimeScript RT reagent Kit (TaKaRa) according the manufacturers instructions. The corresponding primer sequences were as follows: UBE3C sence primer: GTGCCCGGCTGCTTCCGCGGC; reverse primer: CCTCCTTCCTGCTCGCGCCGCC. -actin sence primer: TCCCTGGAGAAGAGCTACG; reverse primer: GTAGTTTCGTGGATGCCACA. For qrtPCR analysis, aliquots of cDNA were amplified using SYBR Premix Ex Taq (TaKaRa). PCR reactions were done in triplicates with following conditions: 95°C/30 s, 40 cycles of 95°C/5 s, 60°C/15 s and 72°C/10 s on MXP3000 cycler (Stratagene) and repeated at least three times. Relative mRNA levels were calculated using the -Ct method using -actin as control and expressed as 2^(-Ct).
Cell proliferation was measured using a CCK-8 kit (Dojindo, kumamoto, Japan). RCC cell lines infected with Lentiviruses were seeded into 96-well plates in 100 µl of medium containing 10% FBS and incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2. After 24, 48, 72 and 96 h, the medium was replaced with 90 µl of fresh medium and 10 µl CCK-8 solution was added to each well. Cells were then incubated for 2 h at 37°C in 5% CO2, after which absorbance at 450 nm was measured using a microplate reader (Molecular Devices, CA, USA). Each experiment was performed in triplicate and repeated in quadruplicate for each condition.
786-O and ACHN cells infected with lentiviruses were seeded separately in six-well plates at a density of 1102 cells/well. After incubation at 37°C for ~1014 d, cells were washed twice with PBS, stained with Giemsa solution (AppliChem, Darmstadt, German), and allowed to air dry at room temperature. The number of colonies was microscopically counted, Each experiment was performed in triplicate.
For transwell migration assays, cells were plated in the top chamber with the non-coated membrane (24 well insert; 8m, Corning Costar Corp). For invasion assays, matrigel (BD biosciences) was allowed to polymerize at the base of the top chamber of a 24 well transwell plate (for 45 minutes at 37°C. 786-O and ACHN cells or its derivative cells (1105 cells/well) were starved in serum- and growth factor-free medium for 24 hours and added to the top chambers. The bottom chambers were filled with serum-containing medium. Cultures were maintained for 48 hours, followed by removal of non-invading cells from the upper surface of the membrane with cotton swabs. Cells that invaded were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and stained with 0.1% crystal violet for 15 minutes at room temperature. Excess dye was washed off.
Exponentially growing cells were seeded 24 h prior transfection at 1.0105 cells/well (80% confluence) into 12-well tissue culture plates. Transient co-transfection with luciferase construct (pLEF-luc, pC/EBP-luc), pSV--galactosidase vector, expression vector (i.e., UBE3C, shUBE3C) or their corresponding empty vectors controls was carried out using the Lipofectamine 2000 Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The DNA/Superfect ratio was 1:7.5 (wt/wt). After incubation for 48h, cells were assayed using the Luciferase reporter assay system kit (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA), according to the manufacturers instructions. The promoter activity was calculated from the ratio of firefly luciferase to -galactosidase levels and expressed as arbitrary units. All experiments were performed in triplicate and data were pooled from three independent experiments.
Sections of 5-m thickness were deparaffinised in xylene and rehydrated through graded alcohol series. For antigen retrieval, the sections were heated in EDTA buffer (pH9.0) for 20 min at 100°C. The tissue sections were then treated with 0.3% H2O2 for 5 min to block the endogenous peroxidase activity and subsequently rinsed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 3 times, 2 min each time. Rabbit anti-UBE3C antibody (ABclonal) was used to detect UBE3C expression. The antibody was diluted 1:100 in TNB blocking solution and incubated with the samples overnight at +4°C. After rinsing with PBS, the tissue sections were then incubated for 30 min with mouse anti-rabbit secondary antibody. The slides were washed with PBS again, and 3,3-diaminobenzidine (DAB) was used as a chromogen to visualize the reaction. Finally, the sections were counterstained by hematoxylin, dehydrated and mounted in Diatex. Negative control immunostaining was performed by omission of the primary antibody. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) specimen was examined as positive control.
UBE3C expression was evaluated by two investigators blinded to the clinicopathological data of the patients. Sections were considered to be positive when tumor cells showed cytoplasmic or nuclear UBE3C expression. Every tumor was given a score by multiplying the percent of stained cells (0, 0%; 1, less than 25%; 2, 2550%; 3, more than 50%) with the staining intensity (0, no staining; 1, weak staining; 2, moderate staining; 3, strong staining). We then designated total score 03 as low expression, whereas total score 49 as high expression.
Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS 13.0 for Windows (SPSS Inc). The Pearson Ï 2 test or Fishers exact test was used to compare qualitative variables, and the Student t test for quantitative variables. All statistical tests were two-sided, and p value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.