Patients with newly diagnosed multiple myeloma who had completed induction treatment and were scheduled to undergo stem cell mobilisation followed by high dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell support at Oslo University Hospital, Norway, were eligible for the study. The patients received written and oral information about the study by the treating physician. Upon written consent, patients were randomized in a double blinded fashion to receive either AndoSan or placebo orally, 60mL daily, starting from the day of stem cell mobilisation and continuing until the end of aplasia after high dose chemotherapy, a period of approximately seven weeks. Randomisation was performed by a study nurse drawing an envelope from a preprepared stack, containing a number from 1 to 50, in a random fashion. Each number corresponded to an allocated treatment (Agaricus or placebo), which was determined beforehand by a flip of a coin and known only to the study nurse. The study product (Agaricus or placebo) was prepared by the study nurse in identical dark glass bottles, identified only by the patient's study number. Thus, the content of the bottles was known to the study nurse but was blinded to the patients and the rest of the hospital staff.
The primary end points were (1) changes in serum levels of cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors in peripheral blood, (2) differences in expression levels of genes involved in immune activation by whole genome assay, both measured on the day of inclusion and at the end of intake of the study product, and (3) differences in the stem cell harvest product of a number of mononuclear cell subsets associated with the immune system. All biological samples were kept at 20°C and analyzed together at the end of the study. The blinding was unravelled after all laboratory tests had been performed. The secondary end points were (1) clinical response to treatment, (2) time in neutropenia, (3) days with body temperature above 38.0°C, (4) days with i.v. antibiotics after stem cell infusion, (5) time to new treatment, (6) overall survival, and (7) quality of life. The basis for the sample size (n = 40) was the results of two earlier studies showing significant changes in the levels of cytokines in healthy volunteers (n = 14) and in patients with ulcerative colitis (n = 10) and Crohn's disease (n = 11) after intake of AndoSan. The data were collected by the principal investigator and stored at a research file at the server of Oslo University Hospital. The study was approved by the Regional Committee for Medical and Health Research Ethics (REC South East). The Norwegian Medicines Agency was notified of the study according to national regulations.
The commercial mushroom extract AndoSan, produced by the company ACE Ltd., Japan, and distributed by Immunopharma AS, Norway, was used as source of AbM. The extract contains the following Basidiomycetes mushrooms: 82.4% of AbM, 14.7% of Hericium erinaceus, and 2.9% of Grifola frondosa. AndoSan is registered as a food product in Japan, EU, and Norway.
Placebo was water with added color.
Stem cell mobilisation was induced by cyclophosphamide 2g/m2 i.v and G-CSF. Stem cell harvesting by leukapheresis was started when the CD34+ cells in peripheral blood were >20  109/L, that is, on days +10+12 after stem cell mobilizing chemotherapy. Aliquots of the leukapheresis product were kept frozen and analysed by flow cytometry at the end of the study. High dose chemotherapy was melphalan 200mg/m2 i.v. on day +2, followed by reinfusion of autologous stem cells on day 0.
A 3H-thymidine incorporation assay was performed on MOPC315.BM cells, that is, mouse myeloma cells. The cells were suspended in RPMI 1640 (Lonza, Verviers, Belgium) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Sigma-Aldrich, Diegem, Belgium) and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich), plated in 96-well plates (5  104/100L/well) and cultured for 24 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2 in the presence of different AndoSan concentrations. For the last 16 hours of culture, 0.17Ci of [Methyl-3H] thymidine (Perkin Elmer, Zaventem, Belgium) was added to each well. DNA was harvested on Multiscreen Harvest Plates (Millipore, Carrightwohill, Cork, Ireland) using Filter Mate Harvester (Perkin Elmer). Plates were dried for 3-4 hours before adding 25L/well of Microscint O (Perkin Elmer) followed by radioactivity measurement (c.p.m.) with TopCount NXT Microplate Scintillation Counter (Perkin Elmer).
The following cytokine, chemokine, and growth factor serum levels were measured at the day of inclusion and 13 days after the end of the intake of AndoSan, using multiplex bead-based sandwich immunoassay technology (Bio-Rad Laboratories AB, Sundbyberg, Sweden), strictly following the manufacturers instruction: IL-1, IL-1ra, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-13, Eotaxin, G-CSF, IFN-, IP 10, MCAF, MP1-, MP1-, PDGF, RANTES, and TNF-.
The leukapheresis products were suspended in RPMI 1640 medium (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum and were analyzed using flow cytometry. Eight-colour analyses were performed for the identification of the lymphocyte subsets with the following monoclonal antibodies: CD2, CD3, CD4, CD5, CD7, CD16, CD25, CD56, CD45, CD45RA, CD45RO, CD9, CD127, CCR7, and HLA-DR antigens. All antibodies were purchased from BD Biosciences (San Jos©, CA, USA) except for anti-CD8, anti-CD56, and anti-CD127 which were purchased from Beckman Coulter (Brea, CA, USA); anti-CCR7 was purchased from R&D systems (MN, USA) and anti HLA-DR from Biolegend (San Diego, CA, USA). The Blood Dendritic Cell Enumeration Kit (Miltenyi Biotech GmbH, Bergish Gladbach, Germany) was used according to the supplier's protocol to determine plasmacytoid dendritic cells, type 1 and type 2 myeloid dendritic cells. Flow cytometry analysis was performed on the LSR II instrument (BD Biosciences). Data analysis was performed using the Flow-Jo software (Tree Star, Ashland, OR, USA).
Bone marrow aspirate for gene expression studies was taken on the day of inclusion and 13 days after end of intake of the study product. Microarray analyses were performed using the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Gene 1.0 ST Arrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA), which contains more than 28,000 gene transcripts. 150ng of total RNA was subjected to Ambion WT Expression Kit (Ambion/Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, U.S.) and GeneChip WT Terminal Labeling Kit (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA) following the manufacturers' protocols for whole genome gene expression analysis.
For comparison of gene expressions, a two-way ANOVA model was used. All raw intensities of microarray datasets were quantile normalized. Genes with low expression variation, that is, maximum to minimum intensity less than twofold difference, were excluded leaving 7564 genes. Subsequently, a pair-wise Fisher's linear discriminant analyse was used to select the top two percentages of the most differently expressed genes (i.e., 152 genes) between control and the Agaricus group. The selected genes were classified into four clusters by using K-means clustering algorithm. In addition, microarray data were analysed through the use of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (http://www.ingenuity.com/).
The patients were classified at inclusion according to the international staging system for multiple myeloma.
Treatment response was assessed by changes in the serum level of the M-component from start of induction until three months after high dose chemotherapy according to the international uniform response criteria.
 Time to regeneration of neutrophils was the time between infusion of stem cells and the first day of a stable neutrophil count of 0.5 · 109/L or above.
Time to new treatment was the time between inclusion and start of second line chemotherapy following progression or follow-up as of July 1, 2014.
Overall survival was the time between inclusion and follow-up as of July 1, 2014, or death.
Health related quality of life was measured at start of the study and three months after end of aplasia using the QLQ-C 30 questionnaire validated for multiple myeloma.
Differences between changes in serum levels of cytokines, chemokines, and growth factor before and after treatment in the two treatment groups were calculated by the Independent Samples t-test on the IBM SPSS Statistics 21 program. The same program was used for calculation of differences in cell surface expression of leukocyte antigens in the leukapheresis product. The survival analyses were performed by the Kaplan-Meier test. Statistical methods used in gene expression analyses are reported under that section.