The present experiment was conducted according to the licence obtained from the Danish Animal Experiments Inspectorate, Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries, Danish Veterinary and Food Administration.
A total of forty piglets (8·30 (sd 1·45) kg) from four litters obtained from the herd at the Faculty of Science and Technology, Aarhus University, Foulum (Denmark), were used in the present experiment. All piglets were from sows tested homozygote carriers of the dominant gene encoding for the intestinal F18 fimbriae receptors (a DNA marker genotyping-based test was performed on DNA extracted from hair samples by van Haeringen laboratorium b.v., Wageningen, The Netherlands); thus, piglets used in the present study were susceptible to Escherichia coli F18. Piglets were provided neither additional milk nor creep feed from birth to weaning (separation from the sow).
Of the forty piglets, four piglets, one from each litter, were killed at the beginning of the experiment (Base) and thirty-six piglets, nine per litter, were kept alive and randomly allocated to one of the following three treatment groups: (1) separated from the sow and fed a commercial BC product (BC-fed); (2) separated from the sow and fed a commercial MR (MR-fed); (3) kept with the sow (Sow-Milk). Piglets from the BC-fed and MR-fed groups were separated from the sows at 23 d of age, transferred to the experimental stable and provided either skimmed standardised BC (European Colostrum Industry S. A.) or a commercial MR (Vitfoss) ad libitum for 8 d. The chemical composition of the sow milk, BC and MR is given in Table 1. Liquid BC and MR were prepared using an automated wet feeder (Mambo Automix 25; Wit-Mambo, Inc.), in which BC and MR powders were automatically mixed with warm water (45°C; approximately 150 g of powder in 1 litre of water) and given to the piglets on a regular basis. To help the piglets become familiar with the automated wet feeder and stimulate the consumption of liquid BC or MR, sow milk collected from the corresponding sow was fed to the piglets using the feeder upon arrival to the experimental stable. Piglets from the Sow-Milk group were kept with their dams in the farrowing unit until the end of the experiment without any supplementary feed or milk. To minimise the variation among the treatment groups in terms of stress caused by separation from the sow, piglets from the Sow-Milk group were transported in a similar manner to those in the other groups and returned to the sows again. 
A total of three littermates of similar weight were housed together in 1·45  1·70 m2 pens with rubber mat and sawdust bedding. Each pen was equipped with an automated wet feeder and a water nipple giving permanent free access to feed and water to all the three piglets. Temperature in the experimental stable was maintained at 24°C throughout the experiment and the pens were equipped with a heat lamp. To reduce the impact of moving BC-fed and MR-fed piglets from the sows when compared with Sow-Milk piglets regarding microbial contamination from the environment, material (a mixture of bedding and faeces) from the floor of pens where the sows were housed was collected daily and spread in the corresponding pens where BC-fed and MR-fed piglets were housed. In this way, all piglets were continuously exposed to the microbiota of sow faecal origin.
The body weight of each piglet was recorded at the beginning (day 1) and at the end (day 8) of the experiment. BC and MR consumption was measured by recording the weight of the powder provided to the piglets and any unconsumed residue on a daily basis. For Ig analyses, blood samples were collected in heparinised Vacutainer tubes by puncture of the jugular vein of each piglet on days 1 and 8. Plasma was obtained after centrifugation of blood samples at 2000 g for 10 min and stored at  20°C until analysis. Faecal samples were collected from the rectum of each piglet on days 1, 3, 5 and 8 of the experiment. Rectal temperature was recorded with a digital thermometer (Kruuse) before faecal sample collection. The consistency of faecal samples (1 = hard, dry and cloddy; 2 = firm; 3 = soft with shape; 4 = soft and liquid; 5 = watery and dark; 6 = watery and yellow; and 7 = foamy and yellow), used as an indicator of the occurrence of diarrhoea, was recorded immediately after sample collection. A faecal consistency score >3 was defined as clinical signs of diarrhoea(  ). The frequency of diarrhoea was calculated by counting pig days with a diarrhoea score >3. The alertness score (0 = normal and 1 = depressed or listless) of each piglet was also assessed visually throughout the experiment.
One piglet per litter (four in total) was killed using a captive bolt gun at the beginning of the experiment (day 1) and one piglet per litter and treatment (12 in total) was killed at the end of the experiment (day 8). The abdomen was incised and gall bladder (for bile collection) was obtained immediately after bleeding the animal. The gastrointestinal tract (GIT) was immediately removed and divided into five segments (stomach, proximal and distal small intestine, caecum and mid-colon), and digesta from each segment was collected for bacterial enumeration. The length of the small intestine, from the pyloric sphincter to the ileocolonic junction, was measured before digesta collection. Approximately 15 cm segments from 10 % (representing duodenum), 50 % (jejunum) and 90 % (ileum) of the length of the small intestine measured from the duodenum were removed, opened lengthways and washed with ice-cold PBS. Mucosa was collected from these segments by gently scraping with a glass microscope slide and immediately stored at  20°C until Ig analyses. For gene expression analyses, mucosa (approximately 100 mg) collected from the same sites of the small intestine (jejunum and ileum) was preserved in the RNAlater (1 ml; Sigma-Aldrich) and stored at 4°C for 1 d before storage at  20°C. Intestinal segments (jejunum and ileum) were also collected from piglets killed at the end of the experiment and used in the porcine intestinal organ culture (PIOC) experiment.
A total of twelve piglets, one per litter and treatment, were used in the PIOC experiment. Immediately after incising the abdomen and bleeding the animal, three jejunal segments and three ileal segments (15 cm each) were collected aseptically, immersed in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM), kept on ice and immediately used in the PIOC experiment. E. coli F18 inoculum was prepared by retrieving the bacterial culture stored at  80°C, streaking on blood agar (Oxoid, Deutschland GmbH) and culturing at 37°C for 18 h. A loopful of E. coli F18 colony was taken from blood agar and suspended in 4 ml of PBS. The suspension (0·1 ml) was poured onto Iso-Sensitest agar (Oxoid) and incubated at 37°C overnight. PBS (10 ml) was poured into the incubated plate, and the agar surface was gently rubbed with a sterile Drigalski spatula to remove the bacterial colonies from the agar plate. The bacterial suspension was transferred into a sterile tube and diluted 1:20 (v/v) with DMEM to obtain an inoculum of 5  108 colony-forming units (cfu)/ml before being used for inoculating the intestinal segments of piglets. The E. coli F18 strain was isolated at the Danish Veterinary Institute (Frederiksberg, Copenhagen, Denmark) from the intestinal content of a pig with post-weaning diarrhoea. It was found to harbour genes for enterotoxins heat stable toxin b (STb), heat labile toxin (LT), Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli heat-stable enterotoxin 1 (EAST1), Shiga toxin 2e and fimbriae F18. The bacteria were found to be haemolytic when grown on blood agar (Oxoid)(  ).
Of the collected jejunal and ileal segments, two pieces were inoculated with E. coli F18 and one piece was used as a control (not inoculated). The PIOC experiment was conducted based on the model described by Naughton et al. (  ) and modified by Sugiharto et al. (  ). In brief, polyethylene tubing (Siltube; Eurpharm; 6 mm in diameter) was inserted into either end of the segment and tied with a suture to keep the tubing in place. The tissue was washed with 50 ml of PBS (pH 7·2) using a Fill-Master pump (Type 311; Delta Scientific Medical; flow rate of 7·7 cm/s). The other end of the segment was tied, 10 ml of DMEM alone (control) or DMEM containing E. coli F18 was inoculated, and the segment was sealed with a Teflon plug (5 mm in diameter). The segment was immersed in DMEM in a 300 ml infusion bottle in a shaking water-bath at 37°C, removed after 1·5 h and washed with 50 ml of PBS after removing the content. Mucosa was collected from a piece of the segment and preserved in the RNAlater for gene expression analyses. The remaining segment was weighed and homogenised (Janke-Kunkel Ultra-Turrax T25 homogeniser; Bie&Bentsen a/s) for 20 s in PBS. E. coli were enumerated on MacConkey agar (Merck KGaA) after aerobic incubation at 37°C overnight.
Microbiological analyses were performed on faecal samples (collected daily from one piglet per pen) and digesta samples collected from piglets that were killed at the end of the experiment. Approximately 1 g of faeces and 10 g of digesta were suspended in a pre-reduced salt medium(  ) and homogenised in a laboratory paddle blender (Seward Stomachers 80 Biomaster; Lab System) for 2 min. Serial 10-fold dilutions were then prepared in the same medium and samples (0·1 ml) were plated on selective media. Haemolytic E. coli and coliform bacteria were enumerated on blood agar (Oxoid) and MacConkey agar (Merck), respectively, after aerobic incubation at 37°C for 1 d, whereas lactic acid bacteria (LAB) were enumerated on de ManRogosaSharpe agar (Merck) after anaerobic incubation at 37°C for 3 d. The number of E. coli and LAB is presented as the LAB:haemolytic E. coli ratio or the LAB:total coliform bacteria ratio.
The concentrations of total IgG, IgA and IgM in the mucosa, plasma and sow milk and those of IgA and IgM in bile were measured using the pig Ig ELISA quantification kit (Bethyl Laboratories). The same Ig types were measured in the skimmed standardised BC and commercial MR using the bovine Ig ELISA quantification kit (Bethyl Laboratories). All assays were performed according to the manufacturer's instructions and run in duplicates. The intra-assay (within-plate) CV for the ELISA was 0·112·5 % and the inter-assay (between-plate) CV was 0·212·3 %. Before the assays, the mucosa samples were vortexed in PBS (1:10, w/w) for 60 s and centrifuged at 2000 g for 10 min and the supernatant was obtained and used for the determination of Ig concentrations and total protein content. The concentration of IgA in the intestinal mucosa is expressed as the relative amount of IgA to that of total protein. Total protein content in the mucosa was quantified using the Advia 1650 autoanalyser (Siemens Medical Solutions).
The mucosa was homogenised by transferring it into a lysis buffer (Macherey-Nagel GmbH & Co. KG) and treated with a rotorstator homogeniser (TissueLyser LT; Qiagen GmbH) until it was uniformly homogeneous. Total RNA was isolated using the NucleoSpin RNA kits (Macherey-Nagel) according to the manufacturer's protocols. The quality and quantity of RNA were assessed using agarose gel electrophoresis and a spectrophotometer (NanoDrop ND-1000; Saveen Werner), respectively. All samples were adjusted to 200 ng/l and converted into complementary DNA using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. All PCR were run in 384-well plates by mixing 2 l of complementary DNA with 8 l of the mix containing the primers, the probe and 2   TaqMan Master Mix (catalogue no. 4324018; Applied Biosystems) (Table 2). The reactions were run in duplicate for the target genes and triplicate for the housekeeping gene under standard amplification conditions determined for the Applied Biosystem ViiA 7 Real-Time PCR system (Life Technologies). Gene expression cycle threshold (C t) values were recorded using the Applied Biosystem ViiA 7 software. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used as the housekeeping gene. The C t value for the target genes of each sample was corrected by subtracting the C t value of the GAPDH gene from the C t value of the corresponding gene (C t). The samples collected from the jejunal mucosa of Base piglets were used as the reference samples, and the C t value of all the samples was subtracted from the average C t value of the reference samples (C t). The fold change in the expression of each target gene was calculated using the following formula: 2 Ct. 
Data on weight gain, frequency of diarrhoea, rectal temperature, alertness score and plasma Ig concentrations were obtained from each piglet, while data on microbial counts, mucosal and biliary Ig concentrations, and gene expression levels were obtained from one piglet per pen. Bacterial population counts (cfu) were normalised using log transformation, and data on weight gain of each piglet were collected per pen before analysis. Data on bacterial counts obtained from ETEC F18-inoculated jejunal or ileal samples (PIOC experiment) were averaged per piglet before analysis.
The frequency of diarrhoea and alertness scores were analysed using the GLIMMIX procedure of SAS (SAS Institute) with treatment as a fixed effect and litter and pen as the random effects to account for the measurement being made in piglets from different litters and different pens. Data on performance and biliary Ig concentrations were analysed with a mixed model using the MIXED procedure of SAS with treatment and litter as the fixed and random effects, respectively. The remaining data that were obtained on various days (rectal temperature, LAB:E. coli ratio in faeces and plasma Ig concentrations) or from various segments of the gut (LAB: E. coli ratio in the digesta, number of E. coli colonising the intestine, mucosal Ig concentrations and gene expression levels) of the same piglet were analysed using the MIXED procedure with treatment and sampling day or gut/intestinal site as the fixed effects and litter as a random effect and taking into account that samples originated from the same animal. For data on rectal temperature and plasma Ig concentrations, which were obtained from piglets from different litters and pens, the random effects of litter and pen were imposed. The interaction between treatment and sampling day or gut/intestinal site was initially included in the model, but excluded when it was not statistically significant. Differences among the treatment groups were tested using the post hoc TukeyKramer test. Differences were considered significant when P 0·05. Results are presented as least-squares means and standard errors.