The study was approved by the North Carolina State University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Twenty piglets (commercial hybrids) were weaned at 18 days of age and divided in 2 groups (n=10) receiving either a basal diet (control group) or the basal diet supplemented with microencapsulated organic acids and pure botanicals for 2 weeks (OA+PB, 5 g/kg of feed, providing 16.7% sorbic acid, 25% citric acid, 1.7% thymol and 1% vanillin in a matrix of hydrogenated fats; Aviplus-S, Vetagro SpA, Reggio Emilia, Italy; US patent # 7,258,880; EU patent # 1-391-155B1; CA patent # 2,433,484). The control diet contained 2.5% plasma protein (APC, Ankeny, IA), 35.5% SBM (48% CP), 58.7% corn (US #2), 1.65% dicalcium phosphate, 1% limestone, and 1% corn oil, along with a vitamin and mineral premix to meet or exceed the nutrient requirements for this size/age of pig. No antibiotics were added to this diet. Individual body weights were recorded initially (d0), at day 7 (d7) and at day 14 (d14), and average daily gain (ADG) was calculated. Blood samples were collected at d0 and at every 7 days by venipuncture using tubes without anticoagulant, and sera samples were stored at 20°C until analysis of inflammatory cytokines.
At the completion of the study 6 pigs per group were selected for sacrifice, sample collection and analysis. Piglets were killed by penetrating captive bolt followed by exsanguination. Segments of jejunum and ileum were collected and immediately prepared for Ussing chamber analysis. Ileal mucosa scrapings were collected, snap-frozen in liquid N2 and stored at 80°C until gene and protein expression analysis.
Ussing chamber experiments were conducted according to Smith et al.. Segments of jejunum and ileum were collected from the pig, and the mucosa was stripped from the seromuscular layer in oxygenated (95% O2-5% CO2) Ringer solution (in mmol/l: 154 Na+, 6.3 K+, 137 Cl, 0.3 H2PO4, 1.2 Ca2+, 0.7 Mg2+, 24 HCO3 pH 7.4). Tissues were then mounted in 1.13-cm2 aperture Ussing chambers and bathed on the serosal and mucosal sides with 10 mL of Ringer solution. The serosal bathing solution contained 10 mm glucose, which was osmotically balanced on the mucosal side with 10 mm mannitol. Bathing solutions were oxygenated (95% O2-5% CO2) and circulated in water-jacketed reservoirs maintained at 37°C. The spontaneous potential difference (PD) was measured using Ringer-agar bridges connected to calomel electrodes, and the PD was short-circuited through Ag-AgCl electrodes using a voltage clamp that corrected for fluid resistance. Tissues were maintained in the short-circuited state, except for short intervals to record the open-circuit PD. Trans-epithelial electrical resistance (TER; „¦·cm2) was calculated from the spontaneous PD and short-circuit current (ISC), as previously described. After a 30-min equilibration period on Ussing chambers, TER was recorded at 15-min intervals over a 1-h period and then averaged to derive the basal TER values for a given animal.
Mucosal permeability was assessed measuring mucosal-to-serosal fluxes of dextran, according to Moeser et al.. FITC-dextran 4 kDa (FD4) was added to the serosal bathing reservoir of Ussing chambers at a concentration of 100 mg/ml and the flux to the serosal compartment was measured. After a 30-min equilibration period, standards were taken from the serosal side of each chamber. Samples (0.5 ml) were collected from the serosal chambers at 30-min intervals over a 90-min period. The quantity of FD4 was established by measuring the fluorescence in serosal reservoir fluid samples in a fluorescence plate reader at 540 nm. Data are presented as the rate of FD4 flux (mg/cm2/min) over a 90-min period.
Protein levels of interferon-  (IFN-), transforming growth factor- (TGF-), tumor necrosis factor-  (TNF-), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-10 (IL-10), interleukin-12 (IL-12) were determined both in sera samples and in ileal samples using commercial ELISA kits specific for porcine cytokines (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). Sera samples were prepared according to manufacturers instructions. Ileal mucosa scrapings were lysed in lysis buffer (10 mm-Tris, 1 mm-EDTA, 0.5%-Triton X100) and homogenized using a handheld rotor-stator homogenizer before ELISA analysis. Analyses were performed according to manufacturers instructions. Results refer to picograms of cytokine per 100 mg of tissue (pg/100 mg).
Ileal mucosa scrapings were disrupted by grinding in liquid N2 with mortar and pestle, then homogenized using a handheld rotor-stator homogenizer. Total RNA was isolated using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturers instructions. Genomic DNA contamination was removed by treatment with deoxyribonuclease (Ambion DNA-free kit, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). RNA yield and quality were determined spectrophotometrically using A260 and A280 nm measurements. All samples showed A260:A280 ratio of 1.92.0. A total of 1 g of RNA was reverse transcribed with Superscript III (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) according to the manufacturers instructions. The cDNA samples were then treated with RNase H (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) to ensure the removal of residual RNA, then cDNA was quantified with Quant-iT Oligreen ssDNA Assay (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) in order to normalize the quantity of cDNA template used for amplification by real-time PCR. Relative quantities of the transcripts of interest were determined by semi-quantitative real-time PCR (My iQ Single Color Real-Time PCR Detection System and SybrGreen Supermix, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Thermocycling protocol included initial denaturation for 3 min at 95°C, then 40 cycles of 20 s of denaturation at 95°C followed by 20 s of annealing and extension at 60°C. Following amplification, all samples were subjected to a melt curve analysis to exclude presence of non-specific products. Gene expression was normalized using two housekeeping genes coding for portions of porcine ribosomal subunit 60S, such as ribosomal protein L35 (RPL35) and ribosomal protein L4 (RPL4). Average CT was determined for each gene of interest (GOI), and geometric average was calculated for housekeeping genes (HKs), assuming CT as number of cycles needed to reach a fixed arbitrary threshold. Delta CT was calculated as CT GOICT HKs, then a modification of the 2CT method was used to analyze the relative expression (fold changes), calculated relative to the control group.
The sequences, expected product length, accession number in the GenBank database and references of porcine primers are shown in Table 1. Primer oligonucleotides for IL-12, TNF-, TGF-, sodium/glucose co-transporter 1 (SGLT-1), and cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) were designed using PrimerQuest software (IDT, Integrated DNA Technologies, www.idtdna.com). Primers were obtained from IDT, Integrated DNA Technologies (www.idtdna.com).
Cells were grown and transplated according to the procedure by Collington et al.. Briefly, Caco-2 cells were grown in Dulbeccos Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 1% non-essential amino acids, 2 mmol/l L-glutamine, and 10% fetal calf serum. Cells were maintained in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 in air at 37°C. Single-cell suspensions were obtained from confluent serial cultures by incubation with 0.25% trypsin and 0.02% EDTA in Ca2+- and Mg2+-free Hanks balanced salt solution. Caco-2 cells were seeded at a density of 5104 cells/cm2 on to Transwell polycarbonate microporous cell culture inserts (24.5 mm diameter, 0.4 m pore; Costar Ltd, High Wycombe, Bucks, UK); monolayers were used about 1 month after seeding, by which time trans-epithelial electrical resistance (TER) was stable (~150 ©cm2) and cells exhibited a morphologically distinct apical brush border. After, cells were cultured with DMEM containing OA+PB at 0.2, or 1 g/l for 14 days.
For measurement of trans-epithelial electrical parameters, chopstick electrodes were used to measure TER at 0, 4, 6, 10, 12, and 14 days, whereas mucosal-to-serosal fluxes of dextran were measured at 7 and 14 days by applying FD4 (100 mg/ml) on the apical well of the transwell and collecting basal media after 24 h for measurements of FD4 fluorescence.
All cell culture media, supplements, and reagents were purchased from Sigma (Sigma- Aldrich, St. Louis, MO).
Data were analyzed using a two-tail Students t-test with the GLM procedure of SAS (SAS Institute Inc., release 9.2, Cary, NC). Gene expression and cytokine data were analyzed without covariate. Collection day was used as a covariate for the Ussing chamber data. Initial body weight (BW) was used as a covariate for growth performance data. Caco-2 cells statistical analysis was conducted with ANOVA repeated measures for TER and with one-way ANOVA for dextran fluxes followed by Bonferroni and Dunnett post-test, respectively, to compare treated groups with control. In the in vivo study the animal was the experimental unit (n=10 for growth performance; n=6 for Ussing chamber data, gene expression, and cytokine profiling), whereas in the Caco-2 study the experimental unit was the well (n=7). Differences were considered significant at P<0.05, trends at 0.05<P0.10.