EHPC study and pneumococcal detection. Healthy adult subjects were enrolled with informed consent to an EHPC trial. All participants were nonsmoking adults aged 1860 years who had no close contact with at-risk individuals, including young children (under the age of 5 years) and the elderly (over 65 years with comorbidities). Ethical approval was obtained from the National Health Service Research Ethics Committee (11/nasal wash/0592 and 12/nasal wash/0873) and the study was sponsored by the Royal Liverpool and Broadgreen University Hospitals Trust.
Nasal wash samples were obtained 5 days before intranasal inoculation with S. pneumoniae serotype 6B and then on days 2, 7, and 14 after inoculation. Inoculation doses were between 50  103 and 320  103 colony-forming units (CFUs) per 100l. Bacterial preparation, inoculation of subjects with 6B pneumococcus, nasal wash sampling, carriage detection, and quantification of carriage density were done as described previously.
Detection and identification of URT virus. Oropharyngeal swabs were collected 5 days before intranasal inoculation and immediately put in viral transport medium (MWE, Corsham, UK). Viral multiplex PCR was performed as described elsewhere. Briefly, viral RNA was extracted from 200l of viral transport medium and eluted into 85l buffer using the standard Pathogen Complex 200 protocol on the QIAsymphony (QIAGEN, Crawley, UK). The eluates were then analyzed using four multiplex PCR assays on the LC480 real-time PCR machine (Roche Diagnostics, Burgess Hill, UK). The assay panel covered the qualitative detection of influenza A and B, respiratory syncytial virus, human metapneumovirus, human rhinovirus, parainfluenza viruses 14, and coronaviruses OC43, NL63, 229E, and HKU1.
Levels of FH, lactoferrin, SLPI, and -defensin 2 in nasal wash and anti-PspC in sera samples. To measure levels of FH, 96-well plates were coated with nasal wash samples serially diluted in carbonatebicarbonate buffer. Purified human FH (Calbiochem, Watford, UK) was used as a standard. Goat anti-FH antibodies (Calbiochem) followed by anti-goat IgG horseradish peroxidase-conjugated (R&D Systems, Abingdon, UK) were used for detection before development with TMB Substrate Reagent Set (BD, Oxford, UK). Levels of lactoferrin (AssayPro, St Charles, MO), SLPI (R&D), and -defensin 2 (Antigenix America, Huntington Station, NY) were measured by sandwich ELISAs following the manufacturers recommendation. Briefly, 96-well plates were coated with anti-human lactoferrin (AssayPro) or SLPI (R&D). Plates were blocked with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)1% bovine serum albumin before nasal wash samples serially diluted in PBS0.1% bovine serum albumin were added. Human lactoferrin (AssayPro) and recombinant human SLPI (R&D) were used as standards. Biotinylated rabbit anti-lactoferrin or goat anti-SLPI followed by streptavidin-alkaline phosphatase (AbD Serotec, Kidlington, UK) were used for detection before development with 0.5mgml1 of P-nitrophenyl phosphate. Absorbance (450nm) was measured for all assays using the FLUOstar OMEGA plate reader (BMG Labtech, Aylesbury, UK). The -defensin 2 levels were measured using a kit as per the manufacturers instructions (Antigenix America). Levels of anti-PspC IgG were measured by ELISAs using plates coated with recombinant purified PspC and a standard sera sample with known anti-PspC concentration as previously described using the last dilution of the sample with optical density >0.1 to calculate the sample concentration. A four-parameter fit was used to generate the standard curve. All samples were run in triplicate, and samples with coefficient of variation of >15% were repeated.
Depletion and purification of antibodies from nasal wash and sera samples. Nasal wash samples from 10 subjects were pooled and IgG and IgA were depleted by anti-human IgG and anti-human IgA agarose (Sigma-Aldrich, Gillingham, UK), respectively. Samples were incubated with agarose and flow-through fractions were used in pneumococcal adherence assays. Dot blot assays were performed to confirm antibody depletion (data not shown). Serum samples from seven subjects were used for anti-PspC IgG purification. First, purified total IgG was obtained from individual samples by HiTrap protein G affinity column (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK). Purified samples were then loaded in CNBr-activated Sepharose coupled with recombinant purified PspC. Coupling (1mg of ligand PspC to 200mg of sepharose) and anti-PspC purification was performed as per the manufacturers instructions. To confirm anti-PspC IgG purification, ELISAs were performed using plates coated with PspC as previously described.
Bacterial culture for  in vitro  assays. D39 pneumococci were grown in Todd Hewitt broth supplemented with 0.5% yeast extract (THY) at 37°C in 5% CO2 until optical density 0.40.5 was reached. Bacteria were either used immediately for flow binding assays or resuspended in THY 10% glycerol and stored at 80°C for adherence assays.
FH binding and antibody binding assays. Bacterial stocks were washed and resuspended in PBS. For inhibition of FH binding, 107 CFUs were resuspended in 100l of individual nasal wash samples, purified IgA and IgG samples (undiluted), or purified anti-PspC IgG (1/2 diluted) and incubated for 45min at 37°C. To evaluate the saturating concentration of FH binding and for positive control of inhibition of FH binding experiments, bacterial pellets were resuspended in 100l of purified human FH (Calbiochem) (3 to 40gml1) and incubated for 45min at 37°C.
Samples were washed with PBS and incubated in 100l of goat anti-factor H (1/200) (Calbiochem) for 45min at 37°C before wash and incubation in 100l of FITC-conjugated anti-goat (1/500) (Sigma-Aldrich) at 4°C in the dark for 30min. Samples were washed twice and resuspended in 500l of PBS and 4% paraformaldehyde and stored at 4°C before acquisition using a BD LSR II flow cytometer. A total of 20,000 bacterial events were acquired and samples were gated relative to a negative control containing no anti-FH. Anti-PspC IgG binding was evaluated by incubating bacterial pellets with individually purified human anti-PspC IgG samples for 45min at 37°C before detection using anti-human IgG FITC antibody (1/10,000, Sigma-Aldrich). As FH binding to S. pneumoniae is often biphasic with strongly positive and weakly negative populations of bacteria, results are presented as fluorescence index (percentage of positive bacteria multiplied by the geometric mean fluorescence index in arbitrary units).
Pharyngeal epithelial cells and inflammation of epithelium. Detroit 562 pharyngeal epithelial cells (ATCC-CCL-138) were grown and maintained at 90100% confluence in T75 flasks (BD) in Eagles minimal essential media (EMEM; Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK), 2mM L-glutamine (Sigma-Aldrich), 40Uml1 penicillin, 40gml1 streptomycin, and 80gml1 neomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) (complete media). Before adherence experiments, cells were released using EDTA/trypsin (Invitrogen), washed with media, and a suspension of cells were seeded at 1  105 per ml in complete media in a 24-well plate (1ml per well). Cells were ready for use in adherence experiments 3 or 4 days after seeding (90% confluence). For inflamed epithelium, cells were stimulated with interleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor, and interferon- (50ngml1 each) in 500l of complete EMEM for 1618h at 37°C 5% CO2. Cells were then washed 3 times with warmed PBS and 500l of EMEM without antibiotics was added to each well before addition of pneumococci.
Epithelial polymeric immunoglobulin receptor and platelet-activating factor receptor expression by flow cytometry. Stimulated (inflamed) and nonstimulated (noninflamed) cells were scraped from the wells after washing with cold PBS. Cell suspensions were incubated with platelet-activating factor receptor, human monoclonal antibody, and polymeric immunoglobulin receptor rabbit polyclonal antibody (both from Cambridge Bioscience, Cambridge, UK) at 4°C for 15min. Anti-human PE-conjugate and anti-rabbit FITC-conjugate antibodies were added for 15min at 4°C. Cells were washed and stored at 4°C before acquisition using a BD LSR II flow cytometer. A total of 10,000 gated events were recorded. PE goat anti-mouse IgG2a and FITC donkey anti-rabbit IgG (both from Biolegend, London, UK) were used as isotype controls.
Pneumococcal adherence and internalization assays. D39 bacterial pellets were washed with PBS containing Ca2+ Mg2+ (Sigma-Aldrich) before being resuspended and diluted to 2  106 CFUml1 in EMEM with no antibiotics. Bacterial suspensions were added to wells containing D562 cells (500l per well), plates were gently shaken, and 20l was obtained from each well for dilution and initial CFU quantification on blood agar plates (Oxoid, Basingstoke, UK). The 24-well plates were then incubated at 37°C 5% CO2 for 3h. Wells were washed 5 times with PBS Ca2+ Mg2+ to remove unbound bacteria and cells were either lysed with 1% saponin for 10min (for adherence) or treated with 100gml1 of ampicillin in EMEM (1ml per well) for 3h at 37°C 5% CO2 before lysing (for internalization). Recovered bacteria were quantified by serial dilution on blood agar plates. Plates were incubated at 37°C 5% CO2 overnight and initial and recovered CFUs were counted. Averages of initial D39 CFU values were used to create a correction factor so that the recovered CFUs for both strains could be compared. All conditions were performed in duplicate and experiments were performed at least twice. For each experiment, the average recovered CFUs from the control condition (adherence of D39 untreated bacteria to noninflamed cells) was used to calculate fold change for all remaining conditions.
Anti-PspC antibody epitope mapping. Overlapping peptide arrays containing 15-mer peptides with a frameshift of four residues corresponding to the amino acid sequence of PspC3 (GenBank accession no. EF424119) were synthesized in a slide support (CelluSpots, Intavis, Cologne, Germany). Peptide arrays were incubated individually with 29 sera samples collected from 18 subjects inoculated with pneumococcus or from mice immunized with 3 doses of 5g of PspC3 containing 50g of Alum as previously described. Concentration of pneumococcal-specific antibodies was standardized so that each sample used for incubation contained 10gml1 of PspC IgG. Detection was performed using alkaline phosphatase-conjugated anti-mouse IgG and anti-human IgG (Sigma-Aldrich). MTT 0.12M (Methylthiazolyldiphenyl-tetrazolium bromide), BCIP 0.16M (5- Bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate), and MgCl2 1M in citrate-buffered saline pH 7.0 was used for development.
Statistical analysis. Fishers exact test was used to compare the proportion of carriers that were virus positive and virus negative. Pearsons correlation coefficient was used to compare log-transformed FH levels and pneumococcal carriage density. Flow cytometry data were analyzed using Flow Jo v7.6.1 (Tree Star, Ashland, OR). To account for possible correlation among the repeated measurements in carriage status and density, GEE model was employed for the data analysis. For the GEE analysis of carriage presence (yes or no), binomial distribution and logit link function were used. For the GEE analysis of carriage density, log-transformed density was used as the dependent variable and normal distribution and identity link function were used. Three GEE models were estimated to assess the effects of FH levels and virus status on carriage status and density, separately and jointly. Model 1 has virus status (positive and negative) and day (days 2, 7, and 14) as predictors; model 2 has FH levels in log scale and day as predictors; model 3 has FH levels and virus status, day, and interaction between FH levels and virus as predictors.
Differences were considered significant if P0.05. Statistical analyses and graphical presentations were performed using Graphpad Prism5 (La Jolla, CA) and SAS9.3 (Cary, NC).