Patient and control blood samples were collected after obtaining approval from the institutional review board at the Kidwai Memorial Institute of Oncology, Bangalore, India. Ten blood samples each were collected from patients who underwent curative surgery for the removal of tumor and had histologically confirmed gastric adenocarcinoma (details in Supplementary Table 1). None of the patients had previously undergone radio or chemotherapy. Corresponding age and sex matched control serum samples were obtained from individuals with no prior health conditions such as diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Blood was collected from patients and control individuals after obtaining informed consent. Serum was separated from control and test samples using standard centrifugation techniques. The samples were stored immediately at 80 °C.
The total protein amount was measured for each serum sample using Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce. Cat#: 23225). Protein amounts were normalized and equivalent amounts of protein from each of the patient and control serum samples were pooled separately. 10 mg protein each from both patient and control samples were depleted of the top fourteen abundant serum proteins using a Human-14 Multiple Affinity Removal Column (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA. Cat# 5188-6557; 4.6  50 mm). Post-depletion, 600 g protein from each of the samples was recovered.
After depletion, equal amount of protein from gastric cancer and control samples were processed for iTRAQ labeling as previously described. Briefly, 160 g protein each from both the sample sets was subjected to reduction with 2 l of reducing agent, TCEP [tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine] at 60 °C for 1 h. The reduced samples were further alkylated with 2 l methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) at room temperature for 10 min. The samples were then digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI. Cat#V5111) at 37 °C overnight. The tryptic digests were vacuum-dried. Both the test and control samples were split into two equal halves serving as technical replicates and labeled with iTRAQ reagents (Applied Biosystems, Cat#: 4352135) as per manufacturers instructions. Control samples were labeled with iTRAQ reagents containing reporter ions of 114 and 115 m/z, while test samples were labeled with those containing reporter ions of 116 and 117 m/z. The labeling reaction was quenched using 100 l milliQ water after 1 h. The labeled samples were pooled and vacuum-dried.
The vacuum-dried iTRAQ labeled sample was reconstituted with SCX solvent A (5 mM KH2PO4, 25% acetonitrile solution (pH 2.7)) and fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography using a polysulfoethyl A column (PolyLC, Columbia, MD. Cat#: 204SE0502; 200 , 5 m, 200  4.6 mm) connected to Agilent 1200 infinity series HPLC system. Peptides were loaded onto the column and washed for 20 min and fractionated using a 850% gradient of 10 mM KH2PO4, 350 mM KCl, and 20% acetonitrile solution over a period of 30 min. Eluates were pooled to obtain 20 fractions and vacuum-dried. The dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoro acetic acid and subjected to desalting using C18 Stage Tips (3M Empore high-performance extraction disks) and stored at 20 °C until further analysis.
The peptide digest from SCX fractionation were analyzed on LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Easy-nLC II nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Southern Denmark). The peptide digests from each fraction were reconstituted in Solvent A (0.1% Formic acid) and loaded onto trap column (75 m  2 cm) packed in-house with Magic C18 AQ (Michrom Bioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA, USA) (5 m particle size, pore size 100 ) at a flow rate of 5 l/min with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). Peptides were resolved on an analytical column (75 m  15 cm) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a linear gradient of 730% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) over 60 min. Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out in a data-dependent manner with full scan range of 3501800 m/z acquired using an Orbitrap mass analyzer at a mass resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z. Fifteen most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS from each duty cycle and detected at a mass resolution of 15,000 at m/z of 400 in Orbitrap mass analyzer. The fragmentation was carried out using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with 41% normalized collision energy. Dynamic exclusion was set for 30 s with a 10 ppm mass window. Internal calibration was done using lock-mass from ambient air (m/z 445.1200025).
The mass spectrometry data (.raw) was searched against human RefSeq Build 50 protein sequence database (containing 33,833 entries along with common contaminants) using SequestHT and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany, version 1.3.0.339). The search criteria included methylthio modification of cysteine, iTRAQ 4-plex modification at peptide N-terminus and lysine (K) as static modifications and oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification. For both the searches, precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da and two missed cleavage were allowed. The data were searched against a decoy database to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level. For protein identification, a cutoff of 1% FDR at the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) level was employed. Relative protein quantitation was carried out using Reporter Ions Quantifier node of Proteome Discoverer.
Gene ontology-based functional classification of identified proteins was done using Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD, http://www.hprd.org). Molecule class, molecular function, biological process, subcellular localization, tissue expression and domain information for each protein was obtained from HPRD.
Candidate proteins identified from the proteomics study were validated using multiple reaction monitoring. Five serum samples used in the initial experiment and five independent serum samples from confirmed gastric cancer cases and healthy subjects were used for the validation of differentially expressed proteins by liquid chromatography-multiple reaction monitoring (LC-MRM) approach. Protein estimation was carried out by BCA method. Equal amount of proteins from each sample were subjected to reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion as described earlier. The samples were stored in 20 °C until further analysis.
Two proteotypic peptides were picked for each protein from the iTRAQ-based discovery data. SRM transitions were created in Skyline 2.5 from the peptide sequences. A minimum of four transitions were selected for each peptide (Supplementary Table 4). All the selected fragments were y-ions. LC-MRM analysis was carried out by triple quadrupole, TSQ Quantum Ultra mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with Agilent 1100 series HPLC system. Peptides were enriched on a trap column (5 m, 75 m  2 cm.) for 5 min with solvent A (5% ACN in 0.1% formic acid). A linear gradient of 530% solvent B (95% ACN in 0.1% formic acid) for 60 min was used to resolve peptides on an analytical column at a constant flow rate of 350 nl/min. Magic C18 AQ (Michrom Bioresources) material was used to pack both columns. The data were acquired in triplicate. Q1 and Q3 were set at resolution of 0.4 and 0.7 respectively. Collision energy for each transition was optimized after analyzing the results of three preliminary LC-MRM runs.
The data generated in this study was deposited to publicly available data repositories to make it accessible to the scientific community. The lists of proteins and peptides identified in this study were submitted to Human Proteinpedia. (http://www.humanproteinpedia.org). The protein and peptide lists can be visualized using the link http://www.humanproteinpedia.org/data_display?exp_id=00800.
The mass spectrometry data was also deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD001265.