Neutrophils were obtained from fifteen male professional and federated football players who volunteered to take part in this study (Table 1). The subjects and study design was the same as described previously. It was a double-blind study of eight weeks of nutritional intervention with DHA diet supplementation which was registered at ClinicalTrial.gov (NCT02177383). The participants were 22 football players randomly allocated either to the supplemented (n = 11) or to the placebo group (n = 11). During the nutritional intervention 2 football players of the experimental group left to train with Mallorca B team and they abandoned the study, and 5 football players of the placebo group dropped out of trial for different reasons, one of them broke the anterior cruciate ligament of knee, 2 football players left the team, and the other two were promoted to Mallorca A team. Each group consumed one litre of DHA-enriched or placebo (DHA-nonsupplemented) drinks five times a week. All subjects were informed of the purpose and demands of the study before giving their written consent to participate. The study protocol was in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki for research on human subjects and was approved by the Ethical Committee of Clinical Investigation of the Autonomous Community of the Balearic Islands (Palma de Mallorca, Balearic Islands, Spain). Participants in the study were 19.7  0.4 years old, 76.5  2.5kg in weight, and 179.5  2.5cm tall. Waist circumference was 78.4  0.9cm; hip circumference was 97.4  1.2cm; and waist-hip ratio was 0.81  0.01 WHR. Body mass index was 23.7  0.55 BMI, kg/m2. The football players had 92.6  0.2% fat-free mass. VO2max, determined following the test of Leger-Boucher, was 61.4  1.35mL/kgmin. The study was performed at the beginning of the competitive season. DHA supplementation was administered to the footballers for eight weeks, using an almond-based experimental drink enriched with DHA. In order to avoid beverage influence, DHA-nonsupplemented drink was given to the placebo group. Both experimental and placebo drinks were enriched with the same amount of -tocopherol-acetate. There were no differences between anthropometric characteristics or physical activity capabilities, such as age, body weight, body mass index, waist-hip ratio, percentage of fat mass, percentage of fat-free mass, daily physical activity time, or their performance status measured as the VO2max between placebo and experimental groups. Neither were there any significant differences found between the number of circulating neutrophils in the experimental and placebo group.
Both the placebo and the experimental drinks contained 3.0% almond, 0.8% sucrose, and 0.8% different lipids, depending on the type of drink: traces of lemon and cinnamon flavours and 40mg/1L of vitamin E (-tocopherol-acetate). The lipid content in the placebo drink was 0.8% refined olive oil whereas in the experimental drink it was 0.6% of the same refined olive oil and 0.2% DHA-S Market (Martek Biosciences Corporation, Columbia, EEUU). The two almond drinks were produced by Liquats Vegetals S.A. (Girona, Spain) following standardized procedures. The placebo and experimental beverages were identical in both taste and appearance.
The experimental drink had significantly higher concentrations of the fatty acids C20:3 (21M), C22:0 (76M), C22:5 (1715M), and C22:6n3 (3457M) than the placebo drink in which they were undetected. The daily intake of 1 litre of experimental beverage for five days a week during eight weeks represented a mean daily supplementation intake of 1.14g of DHA to which the intake of omega-3 in the diet must be added. DHA intake of the placebo group was only from the diet. Nutrient intake by the diet was determined beforehand using a previously published seven-day questionnaire.
The impact of DHA diet supplementation was measured by determining fatty acid composition of erythrocyte membranes before and after nutritional intervention. Erythrocytes were obtained from the blood samples taken at the beginning and at the end of the nutritional intervention as indicated above. Fatty acids were extracted and analysed following a previously described procedure.
Venous blood samples were obtained from the antecubital vein of sportsmen in suitable vacutainers with EDTA as anticoagulant. Blood samples were obtained after eight weeks of nutritional intervention at 08:00 on a training day after 12h overnight fasting. Neutrophil fraction was purified following an adaptation of the method described by B¸yum. Blood was carefully introduced on Ficoll in a proportion of 1.5:1 and was then centrifuged at 900g, at 4°C for 30min. The precipitate containing the erythrocytes and neutrophils was incubated at 4°C with 0.15M ammonium chloride to haemolyse erythrocytes. The suspension was centrifuged at 750g, at 4°C for 15min, and the supernatant was then discarded. The neutrophil phase at the bottom was washed first with ammonium chloride and then with phosphate buffer saline (PBS), pH 7.4.
Purified neutrophils from experimental and placebo groups were divided into three aliquots, each of which was cultured with RPMI 1640 culture medium containing 2mM L-glutamine, but three different treatments were applied: control group: neutrophils treated only with culture medium (RPMI 1640); PMA group: neutrophils treated with culture medium (RPMI 1640) in addition to PMA (PMA 5g/mL); PMA and vitamin C group: neutrophils treated with culture medium (RPMI 1640) in addition to PMA (PMA 5g/mL) and ascorbate (3mM). All neutrophil groups were incubated in polypropylene tubes at 37°C for 2 hours. Subsequently, the cells were pelleted by centrifugation (900g, 5min, 4°C) and cell-free supernatants were stored at 80°C until biochemical determinations; the determinations made in the cell-free supernatants will be considered as determinations in the extracellular media. Neutrophils were resuspended with 2mL of PBS and divided into two aliquots of 1mL. One aliquot was centrifuged 900g, 5min, 4°C, and the precipitate containing the neutrophils was lysed with distilled water and stored at 80°C; determinations performed in the neutrophils lysates will be considered as determinations in the intracellular media. A second aliquot was centrifuged 900g, 5min, 4°C, and the neutrophil phase at the bottom was used to obtain RNA by adding 1mL of Tripure and storing at 80°C until further processing.
The activities of CAT and MPO were determined both in the lysed neutrophil solution (intracellular media) and in the cell-free culture supernatant (extracellular media). Both enzyme activities were determined with a Shimadzu UV-2100 spectrophotometer at 37°C. MPO activity was measured by guaiacol oxidation. The reaction mixture contained sodium phosphate buffer pH 7 and 13.5mM guaiacol. The reaction was initiated by adding 300mM H2O2, and changes at 470nm were monitored. CAT activity was measured by the spectrophotometric method of Aebi based on following the decomposition of H2O2 at 240nm.
Cytokine (IL6 and TNF) determinations were performed in neutrophil-free supernatant using individual ELISA kits (Diaclone, lit for GEN-PROBE) following the manufacturer's instructions for use. The overall intra-assay coefficient of variation was calculated to be 3.3% for TNF and 4.4% for IL6; the calculated overall interassay coefficient of variation was 9.0% for TNF and 9.1% for IL6.
We centrifuged the neutrophil lysates at 900g at 4°C for 10min to eliminate cellular debris. The resulting supernatant and the cell-free supernatants were used to measure nitrite and nitrate levels by its transformation into NO which was detected by gas-phase chemiluminescence reaction with ozone using a nitric oxide analyzer (NOA) 280i (Sievers). Nitrite levels were determined following an adaptation of the method described by Castegnaro et al.. Briefly, the purge vessel was loaded with 50mM KCI in glacial acetic acid and 400L of antifoam. A nitrite standard (0.510M) was used to calculate nitrite concentration. 100L of sample or standard was injected in the purge vessel and the area under the curve of NO peaks was recorded and processed using Liquid software. Nitrate levels were determined following an adaptation of the method described by Braman and Hendrix. The purge vessel was loaded with a saturated VCl3 solution in 1M HCl and tempered to 90°C with a current of hot water. To prevent damage to the NOA from the hydrochloric acid vapour, a gas bubbler filled with 1M NaOH was installed between the purge vessel and the NOA. A nitrate standard (5200M) was used to calculate nitrate concentration. 10L of sample or standard was injected in the purge vessel and the area under the curve of NO peaks was recorded and processed using Liquid software. NOx was calculated by adding the extracellular and intracellular concentrations of nitrates and nitrites. To calculate intracellular nitrate concentration it was considered a neutrophil volume of 30  108 L/neutrophil.
Total RNA was isolated from neutrophils by Tripure extraction (Roche Diagnostics, Germany). RNA (1g) from each sample was reverse-transcribed using 50U of Expand Reverse Transcriptase (Roche Diagnostics, Germany) and 20pmol oligo for 60min at 37°C in a 10L final volume. The resulting cDNA (2.5L) was amplified using the LightCycler FastStart DNA MasterPLUS SYBR Green I kit (Roche Diagnostics, Germany). COX2 TNF, IL8 NF, and MPO mRNA expression were determined by multiplex real time rtPCR using human 18S rRNA as invariant reference. The primers and amplification conditions used are listed in Table 2. Relative quantification was performed by standard calculations considering 2(Ct). mRNA levels from the control were arbitrarily referred to as 1.
Statistical analysis was carried out using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) v.18.0 for Windows. Results are expressed as mean  SEM. And p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was applied to assess the normal distribution of the data. The statistical significance of the data was assessed by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). The statistical factors analysed were beverage supplementation (S) and neutrophil treatment (T). The sets of data in which there was a significant SxE interaction were tested by one-way ANOVA. When significant effects of S or E factor were found, Student's t-test for unpaired data was used to determine the differences between the groups involved.