A double-blind controlled trial was conducted with pregnant women that were assigned to receive oral 800 mg docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:6n-3) and 1200 mg of eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA, 20:5n-3) for a total of 2,000 mg of omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, divided into 4 capsules, or matching placebo capsules. All subjects were instructed to take 2 capsules twice a day from enrollment (prior to 16 weeks gestation) until delivery. To assess the effect of Ï-3 FAs to significantly reduce inflammation and insulin resistance in our pregnant population, with a power of 80% and with a p = 0.05 to detect a 1.5-fold decrease compared to placebo, a sample size of 120 overweight/obese women (60 placebo and 60 Ï-3 FAs supplementation) was necessary, assuming a 16.7% dropout rate (50 subjects in each group). This number of patients was expected to be recruited in a 2 year time. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of MetroHealth Medical Center/Case Western Reserve University. Prior to participation, all subjects signed a written informed consent form reviewed and discussed with a study coordinator. (National Institute of Public Health in clinicaltrials.gov: NCT00957476). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00957476?term=NCT00957476&rank=1 
Subjects were recruited from September 2009 to August 2011 at MetroHealth Medical Center through advertisements, web site postings, and from the hospitals telephone referral service. Inclusion criteria were a confirmed singleton pregnancy and BMI (wt/ht2) ¥ 25 at the first antenatal visit. Gestational age between 8 weeks and 16 weeks based on clinical and ultrasound prior to 20 weeks gestation. Subjects, other than BMI ¥ 25, were generally healthy. Exclusion criteria were evidence of a known fetal anomaly, regular intake of fish oil supplements (defined as greater than 500 mg per week within the last four weeks), daily use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents and pre-existing metabolic disorder such as hypertension, diabetes or hyperthyroidism. Other exclusion criteria were allergy to fish or fish products, gluten intolerance (placebo contains wheat germ oil) or women who are vegetarians and do not eat any fish, planned termination of pregnancy or delivery at another hospital. Known HIV positive, illicit drug or alcohol abuse during current pregnancy were also exclusion criteria. Consenting eligible women received one weeks worth of placebo capsules. Those who either did not return or had taken less than 50 percent of the placebo capsules were not allowed to participate. Women passing the compliance run-in were randomized using a computer generated randomization table (generated by Emiment, the supplier of the Ï-3 FA and placebo). Randomization and treatment assignment were carried out by the research coordinators. Study group assignment was not known by study participants, their health care providers, or the research staff. Blister packs were dispensed monthly at routine obstetrical visits at what time compliance and side effects were assessed. There were two visits in the clinical research unit (CRU) at MetroHealth Medical Center for each study participant. Visit one between 816 weeks and visit 2 between 3436 weeks. The two visits consisted in obtaining information height and weight, obtain a sample of maternal blood for plasma cytokine measurements, fasting glucose and insulin measurements. Dietary information have been collected as a form of food frequency questionnaire. Since they have been partially analyzed, we have chosen not to use incomplete information. In the case of elective cesarean section, subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue (35 g) was obtained at the incision site before opening of the fascia. Placenta tissue and cord blood were obtained immediately after double-clamping of the umbilical cord. Adipose and placenta tissue samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen within 5 min of biopsy (3 patients in placebo and 6 patients in Ï-3-treatment group).
Plasma glucose was assessed by the glucose oxidase method (Yellow Springs, OH). Plasma insulin and insulin concentrations were measured by ELISA (EMD Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA). Concentrations of IL8 and IL6 in maternal plasma were measured by Quantikine ELISA kits according to the manufacturer instructions (R&D Systems, MN) with the following CV: 0.44.7% and CV 0.17.2%, respectively. CRP concentration in maternal plasma was determined by using ELISA (Alpha Diagnostics, TX) according to the manufacturer instructions with CV 0.17.2%. Data (mean  SEM) were expressed as delta changes (visit 2- visit1) in placebo vs. Ï-3-PUFA group. Total lipids were extracted from maternal plasma, maternal adipose and placenta tissue with 2:1 (v/v) chloroform:methanol and washed with 0.88% KCl. Fatty acid methyl esters were prepared using 5% hydrochloride acid in methanol at 76°C. Analysis of fatty acid methyl esters was completed by gas chromatography with column and conditions as previously described. Retention times were compared to standards (Matreya, LLC, Pleasant Gap, PA, Supelco, Bellefonte, PA, and Nu-Check Prep Inc, Elysian, MN) and fatty acids are reported as percent of total identified.
To determine the effect of DHA and EPA at the cellular level in both maternal adipose and placenta tissue, previously collected tissue from an independent subset of 16 pregnant women with a singleton pregnancy recruited at term (3840 weeks) prior to an elective cesarean section was used. This separate study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of MetroHealth Medical Center, Case Western Reserve University. Written informed consent was obtained prior to obtaining blood and adipose tissue. Maternal blood, adipose tissue and placenta were collected as previously described. Maternal pre-gravid body mass index (BMI) and metabolic characteristics were similar to the women consented to double-blind controlled trial and were obtained from the subjects medical records.
Human stromal vascular cells were isolated from subcutaneous adipose tissue collected following C-section. Adipose tissue samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen within 5 min of biopsy or immediately processed for cell isolation. Adipocytes were isolated by digestion of fresh adipose tissue with 1mg/ml collagenase (Worthington Biochemical, Lakewood, NJ) in Hanks buffered solution for 45 min at 37°C. Cells from the stromal adipose fraction (SAF) were pelleted by centrifugation 20 min at 1500 g. The SAF pellet was re-suspended in erythrocyte lysis buffer, centrifuged, suspended in RPMI medium and counted. One aliquot of SVF cells was immediately frozen and the remaining cells were plated at a density of approximate 1.51.8 x 106 cells/well in 12 well culture plates (precoated with 1% gelatin) containing RPMI medium containing 10% FCS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. All the reagents used for SAF cells isolation were endotoxin-free as evaluated by the Limulus Amoebocyte lysate assay (LONZA, Walskerville, MD).
Human trophoblast cells were isolated from obese pregnant women with otherwise uncomplicated pregnancies by sequential trypsin and DNase digestion followed by gradient centrifugation. Cells were plated into 12-well plates at a density of 1.5 x 106 cells/well and cultured overnight in Iscovess modified DMEM culture medium supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37°C under 5% CO2.
For in vitro experiments, the SAF and trophoblast cells were changed to fresh medium after overnight plating followed by incubation under serum-free culture conditions for 24 hours in the presence or absence of fatty acids: C16 saturated fatty acid: palmitic acid (C16:0; 500 M)(PA), C18 monounsaturated fatty acid: oleic acid (C18:1; 500 M)(OA) and 100 ng/ml lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (L4391, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) Ï-3-PUFA: docosahexaenoic acid (C22:6n3; 50 M)(DHA), and eicosapentaenoic acid (C20:5n3; 50 M)(EPA). The fatty acids concentrations were within the appropriate non-toxic concentrations ranging within the physiological range. These concentrations were tested on isolated stromal vascular cells and toxicity was excluded by measuring cell viability by trypan blue exclusion and the lactate dehydrogenase activity in the supernatants (using Cytotoxicity Detection kit (Roche Applied Science))(S1 Fig). Fatty acids were dissolved (1M) in ethanol at 70°C for 10 min followed by combination at 1:10 ratio with 2% fatty-acid-free bovine serum albumin. Prior to each treatment, the palmitic acid (100 mM) was incubated for 10 min at 70°C, while oleic acid (100 mM), docosahexaenoic acid (20 mM) and eicosapentaenoic acid (20 mM) were incubated at 45°C for 10min. The formation of fatty acid-albumin complexes is important to reduce the possible cell toxicity of fatty acids. LPS, EPA, DHA and PA were from Sigma. BSA was fatty acid free.
Total RNA was obtained from isolated SVF cells or isolated trophoblast cells of obese subjects using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Gene expression was monitored by real-time PCR using a Roche thermal cycler (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN) with Lightcycler Fast-start DNA Sybr Green 1 master mix and primers from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA). Specific primers were designed within the 3 coding region of the genes: toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4) (NG-011475) forward: 5-cccaccactcaccagctaat-3; reverse: 5-gccctgtggttcagagaaag-3; interleukin-6 (IL6) (NM_000600) forward: 5-tacccccaggagaagattcc-3; reverse: 5-ttttctgccagtgcctcttt-3; tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF) (NM-000594) forward: 5-tccttcagacaccctcaacc-3; reverse: 5-aggccccagtttgaattctt-3; interleukin-8 (IL8)(NM_000584) forward: 5-gtgcagttttgccaaggagt-3; reverse: 5-ctctgcacccagttttcctt-3; -actin (NM_001101) forward: 5-ggacttcgagcaagagatgg-3; reverse: 5-agcactgtgttggcgtacag-3. Quantification of relative gene expression normalized for beta-actin was performed by comparative CT method and expressed as fold difference between groups.
Total protein lysates were prepared by homogenization of cultured trophoblasts 1.5x106 cells / 50 l buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8, 130 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 10 mM Sodium fluoride (NaF), 10 mM Sodium phosphate (NaPi), 10 mM Sodium pyrophosphate (NaPPi) with protease inhibitors (Sigma Aldrich, MO) and centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4 C°. Protein concentrations were measured with a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, IL). 100 g total protein per well were loaded on 7.5% SDS-running gel (Bio-Rad, CA) and transferred to nitrocellulose filter (Invitrogen, CA). The membrane was blocked with 5% nonfat milk for 1h, incubated with rabbit polyclonal TLR4 (1:200, Santa Cruz, CA) and -actin (1:2000, Abcam, MA) overnight then secondary antibodies 1:2000 and 1:6000, respectively for 1h. Amersham ECL Plus Western blotting Reagents (GE Healthcare) was used for detection. Densitometric data of autoradiograms were quantified by Image J.
The data were analyzed according to the intention-to-treat principle. Categorical variables were compared with either the Chi Square or Fisher exact test. Continuous variables were compared using a Student t test after testing for normal distribution. The changes over time (visit 1 to visit 2) were analyzed as the differences in measurements at visit 2 minus visit 1 and compared between groups using Student t-test. Statistical analyses were performed using Statview (version 5.01; SAS InstituteCary, NC) statistical package. Data are presented as mean  standard deviation and significance was set at p<0.05.