The trial was conducted in accordance with the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki and Japanese Ethical Guidelines for Clinical Studies. The protocol was approved by the institutional review board of each participating hospital. Written informed consent was obtained from all patients. All members of the steering committee and the sponsor jointly designed the trial and collected the data, which were managed by the independent JACCRO GC-04 Data Center. The data were analyzed by an independent data and safety monitoring committee.
The eligibility criteria were as follows: (1) presence of histologically proven stage II, stage IIIA, or stage IIIB gastric cancer, and stage IV gastric cancer with N3 but without hepatic, peritoneal, or distant organ metastasis; (2) treatment by D2 or more extensive lymph node dissection; (3) an age of 2080 years; (4) no previous treatment for cancer; and (5) adequate organ function (a leukocyte count of at least 4,000/ml; a platelet count of at least 100,000/ml; a total bilirubin level of no more than 1.5 mg/dl, aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase levels of no more than 2.5 times the upper limit of the normal range; and a serum creatinine level no greater than the upper limit of the normal range). Tumor stage classification and D classification were in accordance with the Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma (second English edition). For patients to be included in the final analysis, the in vitro sensitivity of tumor tissue to 5-FU had to be successfully evaluated by chemosensitivity testing.
The collagen gel droplet embedded culture drug sensitivity test (CD-DST) was used to assess in vitro sensitivity to 5-FU because it is the only commercially available method distributed as a kit, and various studies have demonstrated its usefulness in evaluating the in vitro chemosensitivity of fresh human tumors. The CD-DST was performed as described previously.
Briefly, a portion of each resected tumor specimen was excised and thinly sliced. Each sample was treated with dispersion enzyme cocktail EZ (Kurabo Industries, Osaka, Japan). The resulting cell suspension was transferred to collagen-coated flasks (CG-flask; Kurabo Industries) and cultured in preculture medium containing 10 % fetal bovine serum at 37 °C in 5 % CO2 overnight. The collagen gel was digested with 0.05 % collagenase (type I; Sigma-Aldrich Japan, Tokyo, Japan) to obtain viable cancer cells. The cancer cell suspension prepared was added to reconstructed type I collagen solution (Cellmatrix type CD; Kurabo Industries) to obtain a final cell density of 1  105/ml. Three drops of the collagencell mixture (30 µl per droplet) were placed in each well of a six-well plate on ice and allowed to gel at 37 °C in a CO2 incubator overnight. Subsequently, the tumor cells in the collagen gel droplet were exposed to 5-FU at concentrations corresponding to the area under the drug concentrationtime curve in patients and were incubated for 120 h. The 5-FU concentrations used were 0.2, 0.4, 1.0, and 2.0 µg/ml. After removal of the medium containing 5-FU, each well was rinsed twice with 3 ml of Hanks balanced salt solution each time, overlaid with 4 ml of PCM-2 medium (serum-free medium; Kurabo Industries), and incubated for 7 days. At the end of the incubation, neutral red was added to each well at a final concentration of 50 µg/ml, and the colonies in the collagen gel droplet were fixed in 10 % neutral-buffered formalin, washed with water, air-dried, and quantified by optical density image analysis. In vitro sensitivity was expressed as the T/C ratio, where T is the optical density of the 5-FU-treated samples on day 7 and C is the optical density of nontreated controls on day 7. The growth inhibition rate (GIR) was calculated as 1  T/C.
In the pilot study using 31 fresh gastric cancers that were provided to the central laboratory in the initial stage of this study, we could not find any significant difference in GIR between 5-FU alone and 5-FU with CDHP, which is included in S-1, i.e., GIR of 57.5  22.5 % and 64.3  17.8 % for 5-FU alone at 1.0 and 2.0 µg/ml, respectively, versus GIR of 58.0  20.3 % and 66.4  20.9 % for 5-FU at 1.0 and 2.0 µg/ml with CDHP, respectively. As a result, in vitro sensitivity to 5-FU was used as a surrogate of in vivo sensitivity to S-1 in this study.
The effect of S-1 can be modulated by the expression levels of 5-FU-related metabolic enzymes, including dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenese (DPD), thymidine synthetase (TS), thymidine phosphorylasa (TP), and orotate phosphoribosyltransferase (OPRT).
Expression levels of TS, DPD, TP, and OPRT messenger RNA (mRNA) were measured as previously. Briefly, total RNA of primary gastric cancer cells was extracted using an Isogen kit (Nippon Gene, Tokyo, Japan) according to the manufacturers instructions. Complementary DNA was derived from each sample, and target complementary DNA sequences were amplified by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using a fluorescence-based real-time detection method [ABI PRISM 7900 sequence detection system (TaqMan); Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA]. The PCR conditions were 50 °C for 10 s and 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 42 cycles at 95 °C for 15 s and 60 °C for 1 min. TS, DPD, TP, and OPRT mRNA levels were quantified as ratios between two measurements (gene of interest/-actin).
Tumors with a GIR equal to the cutoff value or higher were classified as in vitro sensitive (responders), and those with lower GIRs were classified as in vitro insensitive (nonresponders). After a median follow-up time of 3 years, the hazard ratio (HR) for relapse in the responder group as compared with the nonresponder group was calculated by plotting cutoff values of the in vitro GIR from 10 to 90 % with 10 % increments for each of the four different in vitro 5-FU concentrations. Appropriate cutoff values were defined when the HR for relapse and the log-rank P value were at their minimum.
Patients were enrolled within 6 weeks after surgery via a Web-based electronic data capture system (FLADS; Takt Systems, Tokyo, Japan) into the JACCRO GC-04 Data Center. Enrolled patients received two oral doses of 40 mg of S-1 per square meter of body-surface area per day for 4 weeks, followed by 2 weeks of no chemotherapy (Fig. 1). During the treatment weeks, the dosages of S-1 were assigned according to body-surface area as follows: less than 1.25 m2, 80 mg daily; 1.25 m2 or greater to less than 1.5 m2, 100 mg daily; and 1.5 m2 or greater, 120 mg daily. This 6-week cycle treatment was repeated for 1 year after surgery. If patients had grade 3 or grade 4 hematologic toxicity or grade 2, 3, or 4 nonhematologic toxicity, the daily dose of S-1 was reduced, from 120 to 100 mg, from 100 to 80 mg, or from 80 to 50 mg, respectively.
Patients were followed up for 3 years postoperatively. Adverse events were assessed according to the Common Toxicity Criteria (version 2.0) of the National Cancer Institute.
Patients underwent hematologic tests and clinical examinations every 2 weeks. Adverse events were evaluated every 3 months for 1 year after surgery.
The presence of recurrence was determined by means of imaging studies, including ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT), gastrointestinal radiography, and endoscopy. Patients underwent at least one type of imaging study, usually CT, at 6-month intervals during the first 2 years after surgery and then at 1-year intervals until 3 years after surgery. Peritoneal relapse was diagnosed when CT or ultrasonography identified cytology-positive ascites. Case-report forms, which included the results of follow-up tests and evaluations and the survival status of patients, were submitted to the JACCRO GC-04 Data Center 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, and 3 years after surgery.
Our previous retrospective study of 128 patients with gastric cancer demonstrated that survival of the responders as determined by chemosensitivity testing, the histoculture drug-response assay, was significantly superior to that of the nonresponders. Taking into consideration the possibilities of failure of chemosensitivity testing and inclusion of ineligible patients, we estimated that a total enrollment of 300 patients would be sufficient to reproduce similar results in the present prospective study. Because the number of days from surgery to enrollment was likely to differ among patients, we decided to calculate the OS and RFS from the date of surgery. All statistical analyses were performed using JMP 8.0 and SAS 9.2 statistical software programs (SAS, Cary, NC, USA). The 3-year RFS and OS rates were estimated using the KaplanMeier method, and the log-rank test was used to compare the survival curves. A Cox proportional hazards model was used to calculate the HRs. P values less than 0.05 indicated statistical significance.