We studied subjects with T1D between the ages of 835 enrolled in the AbATE and Delay studies (NCT00129259 and NCT00378508). The AbATE study was a randomized open-label study of patients with new-onset (< 3 months) diabetes, and the Delay study was a randomized placebo-controlled study that enrolled subjects with 412 months duration of disease. The drug-treated subjects in both trials received the same dose of teplizumab for 14 days (total dose = 9.033 mg/m2). The descriptions of the study groups and results of the primary endpoint analysis for both trials have previously been published. The data presented herein are limited to the first year of each study to permit direct comparison of studies. The study protocols and use of samples for the mechanistic studies were approved at each study site. Written informed consent was obtained from the participants.
The subjects in both trials underwent a 4-hr mixed meal tolerance test (MMTT) at the time of study entry and after 6 and 12 months. C-peptide levels were measured at Northwest Lipid Research Laboratory (Seattle, WA), and the area under the curve (AUC) was calculated using the trapezoidal rule. We defined responders as subjects who lost < 7.5% of their baseline C-peptide response at month 12. This criterion was more stringent than criteria used to designate responders in the AbATE trial based on year-2 C-peptide results but had been used in previous analyses of treatment responses.
Fresh whole blood samples from AbATE were analyzed at the Immune Tolerance Network Flow Cytometry Core and fresh whole blood samples from the Delay trial were analyzed at the Yale Flow Cytometry Core. Fresh samples from study participants were stained with mAbs to CD8, CD4, CD45RA, CD45RO, and CD62L (BD Pharmingen, CA) to identify the following subsets of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells: CM: CD45RACD45RO+CD62L+; EM: CD45RACD45RO+CD62L; EMRA: CD45RA+CD45ROCD62L; na¯ve: CD45RA+CD45ROCD62L+. Gating strategies were kept consistent throughout each study and percentages of cell types or absolute cell counts (using the number of circulating lymphocytes from the CBC) were compared to identify changes with treatment. For gene expression analysis and cell culture studies, frozen cells were thawed prior to study. Because CD62L expression is affected by freezing and thawing, CCR7 was used to identify CD4+ or CD8+ T cell subsets: CM: CD45RO+CCR7+; EM: CD45RO+CCR7; EMRA: CD45ROCCR7; na¯ve: CD45RO+CCR7+. Cells were acquired with an LSRII or a FACSAria cytometer and analyzed with FlowJo software. Samples were analyzed without knowledge of the treatment assignment.
To analyze the effects of teplizumab on T cell proliferation, PBMCs from 3 different healthy controls were intracellularly labeled with CellTrace Violet dye (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). Thawed PBMCs were cultured with 0.5 g/ml teplizumab and 1.0 g/ml of anti-CD28 mAb for 3 days. Proliferation of different T cell subsets was determined based on dilution of CellTrace Violet dye, staining with the above mAbs and flow cytometry. For some experiments, CD8CM or na¯ve cells were sorted from PBMC and labeled with CellTrace Violet dye. The remaining cells were labeled with CFSE. The two populations were combined and cultured with teplizumab and anti-CD28 mAb as above. The frequency of CellViolet+ CD8CM T cells was determined after 1, 2, and 3 days by flow cytometry.
To identify differences in gene expression among CD8CM T cells, PBMC from the 2 month time point from drug treated responders (n=6), non-responders (n=4), and placebo-treated control subjects (n=8) from the 2 mo time point in the Delay trial were labeled with mAbs to CD2, CD8, CD45RO, and CCR7 for cell sorting. CD8CM T cells (CD2+CD8+CD45RO+CCR7+) were sorted and RNA was prepared. The nanostring nCounter GX Human Immunology gene expression panel was used for gene expression analysis of 594 immunology-related genes.
The Nanostring data were normalized by (Nalini transformation) followed by quantile normalization across all samples as implemented in the R BioConductor Project library preprocessCore (Bioconductor: Open software development for computational biology and bioinformatics R. (Gentleman, V. J. Carey, et al Genome Biology, Vol. 5, R80, 2004). For technical reasons, the results from one of the non-responders could not be normalized to the other 17 samples and the results from this sample was not used in the analyses. Principle Component Analysis was performed as described.
We compared the change in C-peptide AUC over 1 year in the drug-treated responders and non-responders vs control or placebo-treated subjects in each trial. Due to a baseline imbalance in HbA1c between placebo and drug-treated subjects in the Delay trial, C-peptide analysis was corrected for HbA1c levels at study entry in a mixed linear model. Changes in the proportion of T cell subsets from flow studies were compared by repeated measures ANOVA and corrected for the baseline levels. Absolute cell counts (Figure 2B) were calculated from the proportion of cells multiplied by the lymphocyte counts at the same blood draw. The presented flow cytometry data were corrected for the baseline unless otherwise indicated. Unless otherwise indicated, the data shown in the figures represent the LSMEANS values from the statistical model performed with SAS. Grouped data were compared either by t-tests, Wilcoxon test, Chi-squared test, ANOVA, or Kruskal-Wallis test (for data without normal distribution) as indicated. Calculations were done with GraphPad Prism (version 6.0) and SAS (version 9.3).