We conducted a prospective proof-of-concept dose escalation study. We hypothesised that an increase in CA-US HIV RNA would be seen within 24 hours, as observed in similar studies of HDACi and in our initial pilot study of standard dose disulfiram. A three day course of disulfiram would therefore have an effect on latent HIV infection and minimise toxicity given we planned to administer high doses. We assumed that CA-US HIV RNA is log normally distributed and that the standard deviation of pre- and post-dose levels is 0.6 log10 (derived from our previous work quantifying CA-US RNA in people with HIV on suppressive ART for at least 3 years). Based on three dose levels, ten patients per group and a null hypothesis of no change in CA-US HIV RNA, we estimated that the study would have approximately 80% power to detect a 0.50.6 log (3.14.0 fold) difference between pre-treatment and post-treatment peak CA-US HIV RNA within each group at the 0.05 significance level.
We recruited thirty adults aged 18 years or over, receiving at least three antiretroviral agents, with plasma HIV RNA < 50 copies per mL for at least three years, a recent CD4+ T cell count > 350 cells/µL and able to abstain from alcohol during and for 14 days after disulfiram dosing. We excluded individuals with significant acute illness; hepatic, cardiac, respiratory, neurological or renal disease; diabetes; hypothyroidism; malignancy; transplantation; hazardous alcohol use or use of drug formulations that could contain alcohol. Participants provided written informed consent prior to inclusion in the study and The Alfred Human Research Ethics Committee and San Francisco General Hospital Institutional Review Board approved the study. An independent Safety Monitoring Committee reviewed safety and tolerability data after the second cohort had completed dosing. The study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01944371.
The primary outcome measure was change in CA-US HIV RNA in total CD4 T-cells. Secondary efficacy endpoints were sensitive measures of plasma HIV RNA and HIV DNA. Safety endpoints were plasma HIV RNA measured using a commercial assay with a lower limit of detection of 20 copies per ml (TAQMAN v2, Roche), adverse events, serious adverse events, dose limiting toxicity and CD4+ T-cell count.
Three cohorts of participants (n=10 each) were sequentially enrolled and received disulfiram daily for three days at doses of 500mg (licensed dose), 1000mg or 2000mg. Baseline samples were obtained at three pre-dosing timepoints (screening [B1], immediately prior to the first dose [B3] and a timepoint between [B2].
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was used to quantify disulfiram and its metabolites. The analytes were extracted from plasma via protein precipitation and separated on a Kinetex column (phase C18; diameter, 2.1mm50mm; Phenomenex, Torrance, USA) using mobile phases (A) Water, 0.1% formic acid and (B) Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. CD4 T-cells were isolated from stored peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) using a CD4+ T cell isolation kit and magnetic-activated cell sorting columns and CA-US RNA and DNA quantified as recently described. Plasma HIV RNA was measured using an ultrasensitive assay with a dynamic range from a lower limit of detection of 0·19 copy/mL of HIV RNA using 7 mL of plasma, to 106 copies/mL.
This was a non-randomised study in which enrolled participants were allocated sequentially to the first, second and then third dosing cohort. Laboratory assays were performed by staff masked to dosing cohort. All other study staff were unmasked.
Analyses of CA-US HIV RNA modeled the estimated number of copies present in each specimen divided by the input of total RNA in the specimen. Number of copies analyzed was the sum of the estimated number of copies in each replicate. Input RNA was the 18s RNA measurement, multiplied by the number of replicates providing data on number of copies. Analyses of plasma HIV RNA modeled the estimated number of copies present in each specimen divided by plasma volume in the specimen. Specimens with no virus detected were treated as having zero copies.
The primary analysis method was negative binomial regression, with the number of copies being the outcome variable and the input total RNA or plasma volume, respectively, included as an exposure variable, which is equivalent to modeling copies/input. Advantages of negative binomial models over other approaches included the ability to model positively skewed data (i.e. data that violate the normality assumptions underlying many other modelling approaches) that has greater variability at higher values, to readily account for variation in the amount of input total RNA or plasma volume, and to include specimens with observed values of zero without the need for ad hoc adjustments that could introduce bias. The outcome measures for this study are subject to Poisson sampling variability, because <0.1% of a participants bloodstream was sampled for any given assay measurement and the numbers of target molecules tended to be low; negative binomial regression generalizes the Poisson model to also account for other sources of variability, notably person-to-person differences. Specimens with lower input total RNA or volume provide less information about the patients true copies/cells or copies/volume in their entire bloodstream. The models produce estimates of relative or fold changes. For example, an estimated effect of 2.0-fold for post-disulfiram versus baseline CA-US RNA indicates that typical within-person changes were 2-fold (double, 100% increase) from baseline to post-disulfiram. The models are able to produce fold-change estimates while including participants with no CA-US or plasma HIV RNA in baseline samples, because they account for how sampling variability can produce a specimen with zero copies. All three pre-dosing time points were included as baseline observations in the primary a priori analysis; figures show the average of the 3 baseline observations. Inclusion of the random intercept terms focused the analysis on within-person changes. These models were used to estimate changes from pre-disulfiram to time points during disulfiram dosing and post-dosing.
The pharmacokinetic model used 239 disulfiram concentrations from 30 HIV patients. An initial base model structure was established using the full pharmacokinetic profile data from disulfiram. A compartmental model with first order absorption and elimination was used to describe pharmacokinetics of disulfiram and it was parameterized using clearance, volume and absorption rate constant. A relative bioavailability parameter was estimated for each dose level relative to the 1000 mg dose. Parameters were assumed to be lognormally distributed. Diagonal and full variance-covariance block of the parameter distributions were investigated. Additive, proportional, and combined error models were evaluated for residual variability. Individual based area under the curve (AUCs) were estimated using posthoc individual parameter estimates. Data were analyzed using a nonlinear mixed effects (NLME) approach with software (NONMEM, version 7 software, ICON, Dublin, Ireland). The First Order Conditional Estimation with Interaction method was used..
The funding sources had no role in study design; in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; or in the decision to submit the paper for publication. The corresponding author had full access to all data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.