A total of 100 individual normal human liver samples were obtained from the XenoTech LLC (Lenexa, KS) and the Cooperative Human Tissue Network (CHTN, Columbus, OH). Liver samples were obtained from 44 males and 56 females with ages ranging from 22 to 81 years old. The donors included 90 Caucasians, 6 African-Americans, 2 Hispanics, and 2 classified as ˜others.
Trandolapril, trandolaprilat, and simvastatin acid were purchased from Toronto Research Chemicals Inc. (Toronto, Canada). Taq polymerase was obtained from New England Biolabs Inc. (Ipswich, MA). All other chemicals and agents were of the highest analytical grade commercially available.
The INternational VErapamil SR Trandolapril Study (INVEST) was an international, multicenter, parallel randomized controlled trial (clinicaltrials.gov identifier NCT00133692) that enrolled 22,576 hypertensive coronary artery disease (CAD) patients from 862 sites in 14 countries to compare a calcium channel blocker verapamil SR-based treatment strategy versus a beta blocker atenolol-based treatment strategy for the prevention of adverse cardiovascular outcomes. Briefly, participants were randomly assigned to one of the two treatment strategies and were followed with protocol visits every six weeks for the first six months and every six months until the last participant was enrolled. In order to achieve BP control, trandolapril and/or hydrochlorothiazide were added in a protocol-defined manner, and finally non-study antihypertensive drugs were included for BP control. At each visit, BP was measured twice with the patient in a seated position after a 5-minute period. The average of two seated cuff BP measurements was used as the BP at that visit. The BP response to trandolapril was calculated as (BP after trandospril treatment)  (BP before trandolapril use). Only patients with BP readings at these two visits were included in the BP response analysis.
The genetic substudy of INVEST, INVEST-GENES, collected DNA samples from 5,979 participants residing in the United States including Puerto Rico. Participants provided written informed consent to participate in INVEST and INVEST-GENES. The study was approved by an ethics committee for all participating study sites, and was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations for Protection of Human Subjects. This analysis included 486 patients with analyzable data for BP response to trandolapril treatment.
For the clinical study, genomic DNA was isolated from mouthwash buccal cell samples collected from participants using a commercially available kit (PureGene, Gentra Systems Inc., Minneapolis, MN). Genotyping analysis was carried out on TaqMan 7900 HT SNP genotyping platform using Taqman allele discrimination assays from Applied Biosystems (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA). The custom designed probes (6FAM-CATCACCCCTACTGCMGBNFQ, and VIC-CATCACACCTACTGCT-MGBNFQ), and PCR primers (Forward: 5-CCTTAATTTGGTGATTTCACATTGC-3; Reverse: 5-CAAGACATGGTTCAGCTTCTCAAG-3) were purchased from Applied Biosystems (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA), and used in 5 µl reactions in 384-well plates according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
For human liver samples, total genomic DNA was extracted from 100 individuals with Pure Link„¢ Genomic DNA Mini Kit (Life technology, Austin, TX) according to the manufacturers instructions. To determine the 816A>C genotypes, the promoter region of CES1P1 was amplified using the primers and thermocycling conditions summarized in Supplemental Tables 1 and 2. The PCR products were purified with the Pure Link„¢ Quick PCR Purification Kit (Life technologies, Austin, TX), then subjected to Sanger sequencing analysis utilizing the same PCR primers.
Human liver s9 fraction (HLS9) samples were prepared according to a standard procedure. Levels of CES1 expression in individual HLS9 samples were determined by an established western blot assay. CES1 expression of each sample was semi-quantified by comparing the density of CES1 bands with the bands obtained from various amounts of pooled HLS9 samples.
An in vitro incubation study was performed to assess CES1 activity on trandolapril hydrolysis (i.e. bioactivation) in individual human liver samples. Trandolapril (200 µM) and human HLS9 (0.2 mg/ml) were freshly prepared in phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH7.4) from stock solutions, and hydrolysis was initiated by mixing equal volumes of trandolapril and HLS9 fraction work solutions. After incubation at 37 °C for10 min, the reaction was terminated by adding 4-fold volume of acetonitrile containing the analytic internal standard, simvastatin acid (20 ng/ml). Samples were then briefly vortexed, and centrifuged at 13,200 rpm at 4°C for 20 min to remove precipitated proteins. Ten µl of the supernatant was injected into an HPLC-MS/MS system for the analysis of the concentrations of trandolaprilat, the active acid metabolite of trandolapril formed via CES1-mediated hydrolysis.
An HPLC-MS/MS assay was developed to determine concentrations of the trandolapril active metabolite, trandolaprilat, based on a previously published method with some modifications. The HPLC-MS/MS analytical system consisted of a Shimadzu Prominence HPLC system and an Applied Biosystems API 4000 QTRAP mass spectrometer. The liquid chromatographic separation was performed on a reverse phase column (Restek, Ultra II C18, 2.0  150 mm, 5 micron) with gradient elution at a constant flow rate of 0.3 ml/min at 40°C. The mobile phase consisted of 2 mM ammonium acetate and 0.2% formic acid in water (A) and 2 mM ammonium acetate and 0.2% formic acid in methanol (B). The linear gradient was run as the follows: 0 min, 50% B; 3  5 min, ramped to 95% B; 5.5  8.5 min, returned to 50% B. The entire acquisition time was 8.5 min. The MS was operated in an electrospray negative ionization mode using multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) with the m/z transitions of 429.0>168.0, 401.0>168.0, and 435.3>319.0, for trandolapril, trandolaprilat, and simvastatin acid (I.S.), respectively. The assay was validated for accuracy and precision using blank matrix spiked with three concentrations (0.03, 3, 10 µM) of trandolaprilat. Accuracy and precision were within 98.0% to 100.9% and 0.3% to 1.0%, respectively.
The continuous variables are presented as mean and standard deviation (SD) and categorical variables are presented as numbers and percentages as appropriate. Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE) was tested within each race group using chi-square test with 1 degree of freedom. The BP response to trandolapril therapy was calculated as the changes of BP following trandolapril treatment (i.e. BP after trandolapril therapy - BP before trandolapril therapy). The association between the 816A>C genotypes and BP response was evaluated using linear regression within each race/ethnicity group, adjusting for age, gender, trandolapril dose and baseline BP. For in vitro experiments, data are presented as mean  SD of three independent experiments. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was utilized to assess the effect of the 816A>C genotypes on the expression and activity of CES1 in human liver samples. The correlation between CES1 expression and activity on trandolapril activation was assessed with Pearson correlation analysis. All statistical analysis was performed in SAS 9.4 (Cary, NC).