We chose Kazakh hypertensive patients as the main subjects of our experiments. All patients were assigned to one of five groups: (1) Controls, (2) Telmisartan, (3) CsA, (4) VIVIT, and (5) 4-aminopytidine (4-AP). There were 10 individuals in each group (five males and five females). T lymphocytes in patient peripheral blood samples were first activated and proliferated in vitro, then incubated for 48 h under different treatment conditions. Next, we used MACS to isolate T lymphocytes and qRT-PCR and Western blot analyses to measure the relative mRNA and protein expression levels of NFATc1, IL-6 and TNF- in the isolated T cells. The experimental design and procedure are illustrated in Figure 1.
Fifty Kazakh hypertensive patients (mean age 51.9  3.0 years) attending the hypertension clinic of the First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University were enrolled into the study between January and December 2014. All patients were randomised into five groups according to a computer-generated randomisation list kept by a third party. There are exactly five males and five females in each group. Their mean blood pressure was (167.2  7.0)/(102.6  5.1) mm Hg (1 mm Hg = 0.133 Kpa), without antihypertensive therapy.
The diagnostic criteria of hypertension used were those stated in the 2010 Chinese guidelines for the management of hypertension. Briefly, systolic blood pressure (SBP) ©¾ 140 mm Hg and/or diastolic blood pressure (DBP) ©¾ 90 mm Hg, without treatment with antihypertensive medication, were considered diagnostic of hypertension.
Patients with 10 types of disease were excluded from our study: secondary hypertension; cerebrovascular disease; coronary heart disease, rheumatic heart disease; congenital heart disease; acute or chronic infection; autoimmune disease; important organ failure; diabetes; carotid atherosclerosis. Patients included in the study were required both to satisfy the inclusion criteria and not exhibit any of the exclusion criteria. For example, a patient with both hypertension and atherosclerosis would be excluded from our experiments.
The study was conducted according to the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki. All procedures were approved by the Ethics Committee of First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University (approval number 20131011-2) and written informed consent was provided by every subject before inclusion in the study.
Data for cardiovascular risk factors including age, SBP, DBP, smoking history, drinking history, body mass index (BMI), fasting blood glucose (FBG), total cholesterol (TC), triglyceride (TG), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL), and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL) were collected, and compared regarding whether there were significant differences among the control, telmisartan, CsA, VIVIT and 4-AP groups. Smoking was defined as currently or previously smoking. Alcohol consumption was defined as drinking at least once per week for more than half a year.
Reagent used were: human lymphocyte isolation medium (Sigma, USA); Pan T Cell Isolation Kit (Milteni, Germany); 10% foetal bovine serum (FBS) (Hyclone, New Zealand); RPMI 1640 medium (Hyclone, New Zealand); rIL-2 (Sigma, US); FITC-CD3 (Becton, Dickinson and Company, USA); Trizol (Life Technologies, USA); Reverse transcription kit (Thermo Fisher, USA); RT-PCR kit (Qiagen, Germany); RIPA Lysis Buffer (Thermo Fisher, USA); Protease inhibitor (Thermo, USA); BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo, USA); SDS-PAGE (BIO-RAD, USA); anti-human monoclonal antibodies against NFATc1, IL-6, TNF-, and -actin, and goat anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (Abcam, UK); BCIP/NBT chromogenic reagent (Invitrogen, USA); telmisartan (Boehringer-Ingelheim, Germany); CsA (Novartis, Switzerland); VIVIT (Sigma, USA); 4-AP (Sigma, USA).
Instruments used were: MACS separation column, MACS separators (Milteni, Germany); flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter, USA); centrifuges (Eppendorf, Germany); 5% CO2 incubator (Thermo, USA); inverted fluorescent microscope (Leica, Germany); horizontal electrophoresis apparatus (LiuYi, China); real-time fluorescence quantification PCR amplification machine (BIO-RAD, US); vertical electrophoresis apparatus (BIO-RAD, USA); Quality image analysis system (BIO-RAD, USA).
Using a heparinised vacutainer, 10 ml of peripheral venous blood was collected from each subject. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated using human lymphocyte isolation medium and density gradient centrifugation. Using the Pan T Cell Isolation Kit, human T lymphocytes were isolated by depletion of non-target T lymphocytes (negative selection). Non-target T lymphocytes were labelled with a cocktail of biotin-conjugated monoclonal antibodies and the Pan T Cell MicroBead Cocktail. The magnetically labelled non-target T lymphocytes were depleted by retaining them on a MACS separation column in the magnetic field of a MACS Separator, while the unlabelled T lymphocytes passed through the column. The purity of the enriched T lymphocytes was evaluated by flow cytometry; the cells were fluorescently stained with FITC-CD3 and analysed using the MACS Quant Analyzer. Cell debris and dead cells were excluded from the analysis based on scatter signals and propidium iodide fluorescence. The results showed that >95% of cells were T lymphocytes.
T lymphocytes were seeded in 24-well plates containing RPMI 1640 medium, 10% FBS and recombinant interleukin-2 (rIL-2), and cultured in an incubator at 37°C with 5% CO2 for 48 h to promote T lymphocyte activation. The cultured T lymphocytes were treated as follows: telmisartan (final concentration, 100 mol/l), CsA (final concentration, 10 mol/l), VIVIT (final concentration, 2 mol/l), 4-AP (final concentration, 3 mmol/l) and an equal amount of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solution were added to the culture media of cells from the telmisartan, CsA, VIVIT, 4-AP, and control groups, respectively. The T lymphocytes were then cultured for a further 48 h, followed by collection of T lymphocyte suspensions and division of samples into two equal parts for extraction of RNA and protein.
Total RNA was extracted from T lymphocytes using Trizol and the A260/A280 values of the resulting RNA samples were approximately 1.82.0. Reverse transcription reactions were performed using 1 g RNA at 42°C for 60 min, followed by 70°C for 5 min. The total volume of qRT-PCR reactions was 20 l, including 10 l SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (2), 2 l cDNA template, 0.5 l each forward and reverse primers and 7 l ddH2O. NFATC1 (encoding NFATc1), IL6 (encoding IL-6), and TNF (encoding TNF-) gene sequences were obtained from GenBank. Primers were synthesised by Sangon Biotech (Shanghai). ACTB (encoding -actin) was chosen as an internal reference gene (Table 1). PCR and agarose gel electrophoresis were performed with cDNA templates, and standard curves were established using PCR products. The qRT-PCR reaction program was 95°C for 5 min, followed by 39 cycles of 95°C for 10s and 60°C for 30s. Amplification efficiencies were approximately 90100%. After qRT-PCR, amplicons were separated by 2% agarose gel electrophoresis. The data were analysed using the 2Ct method as follows: Ct = Ct target gene  Ct reference gene, Ct = Ct experimental group  Ct control group. The rate of inhibition by telmisartan was calculated as follows: Inhibitory rate % = (mRNA expression of control group  mRNA expression of intervention group) / mRNA expression of control group  100%.
Total proteins were extracted from T lymphocytes using RIPA lysis buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors. Protein concentration was measured by BCA protein assay and 5 µl loading buffer added to each sample before denaturation of proteins in a water bath at 95°C for 5 min and renaturation on ice for 5 min. Protein samples (20 µl = 30 g) were added into each well of gels for SDS-PAGE. After electrophoresis, proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes and blocked with 5% skimmed milk powder for 1 h. Primary antibodies were diluted as follows: NFATc1, 1:2000; IL-6, 1:2000; TNF-, 1:1000; -actin, 1:5000. Blots were incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C, with shaking. Blots were then washed with TBST, followed by incubation with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated Goat Anti-Rabbit secondary antibodies (1:2000) at room temperature for 1 h and washing with TBST. Visualisation was achieved by addition of 5 ml BCIP/NBT chromogenic reagent followed by analysis using a Quality image analysis system. The telmisartan inhibitory rate was calculated as follows: Inhibitory rate (%) = (protein expression of control group  protein expression of interventional group) / protein expression of control group  100%.
Data were statistically analysed using SPSS17.0 software and are expressed as mean  standard deviation (SD) or percentage (%), as appropriate. Multiple data sets were compared by one-way analysis of variance or Chi-square tests. An LSD-t test was used for comparisons between two groups. P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.