Outpatients aged 4580 years with a diagnosis of COPD, defined in accordance with the European Respiratory Society (ERS) consensus statement, who were current or ex-smokers with ¥10 pack-year history were recruited. They had a pre-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of<80 % predicted normal values and a post-bronchodilator FEV1/forced vital capacity (FVC)<70 %. Exclusion criteria have been described previously. Patients who suffered acute exacerbations before study period were excluded. All subjects and donors gave written informed consent to a study protocol approved by the ethical committee of Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital (Si323/2013).
The study design has been described in detail previously. The study was a 4-week randomized double-blind crossover study with a 4-week washout period comparing the effect of oral simvastatin treatment (20 mg once daily) with that of a matched placebo on sputum cytokine biomarkers and airway inflammation in COPD. During the 2-week run-in period and throughout the study, subjects continued their usual COPD medication and withdrew statin therapy for 4 weeks prior to the study entry if they were taking regular treatment. The study was listed on all appropriate clinical trial registries (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01944176). Methods pertaining specifically to the current analysis will be described here.
Demographic measurements were recorded on the first clinical visit (visit 1 screening). Induced sputum and blood samples were collected before and after treatment periods for analysis of sputum cytokines. Spirometry was measured at all study visits. The description of sputum induction and processing of sputum samples, and other methodology related to this study can be found in Additional file 1.
Data are presented as meansSD or median (interquartile range; IQR) as appropriate. Response to simvastatin on sputum mediator levels versus placebo was assessed by general linear model for the standard 22 crossover design. When variables were unsuitable for this, the within-patient treatment differences were calculated and then analyzed by paired t-test for parametric and Wilcoxon Signed Rank test for non-parametric data. The effects of ICS treatment and smoking status on the response to simvastatin was analyzed by unpaired t-test. The rs correlation coefficient was determined for the correlation of ADA and OPN with baseline pre-BD FEV1 and absolute changes in ADA and pre-bronchodilator (BD) FEV1 using Spearmans rank correlation test and Pearson correlation coefficients, respectively. Statistical analysis for multiple comparisons was performed using one-way ANOVA and Welch test with Games-Howell correction for equal variances not assumed or Bonferroni corrections for equal variances assumed. Dunnett t tests was used for doseresponse analysis. All statistical tests were two-sided, and significance was accepted at the level of 95 % and P<0.05 using PASW statistics 18 (SPSS, IBM, Somers, NY).