Synovial tissue was obtained as remnant material, after written informed consent, from OA patients undergoing joint replacement surgery at the Orthopedics department of the Radboud University Medical Center. Protocols were approved by the local committee on research involving human subjects (CMO region Arnhem-Nijmegen, the Netherlands) under NL-number 54055.091.15. Dissected synovial samples were immediately placed in Dulbeccos modified Eagles medium (DMEM) (Gibco), supplemented with 1% penicillinstreptomycin at 4°C. To confirm synovial origin, characterized by the presence of a synovial lining, representative tissue samples were embedded in OCT and 6 M cryosections were cut and subsequently stained by Hematoxilin and Eosin (H&E). Histology and general viability assays were performed with synovial tissue from three donors, gene expression analysis and cytokine secretion assays were performed with synovial tissue from four different donors. For microarray analysis synovial samples were obtained by surgery or via fine-needle arthroscopy from 10 OA patients and 7 controls.
Biopsies were punched out of the synovium using a disposable 3 mm biopsy punch (KAI medical) and collected in RPMI medium (Gibco) containing 10% FCS, pyruvate and pen/strep. Biopsies were transferred into a cryovial and 1 ml of CPA solution (4°) was added. Five CPA solutions were compared in this study: 1. CS2 (BioLife Solutions), 2. CS10 (BioLife Solutions), 3. Standard: 10% DMSO, 10% FCS in RPMI, 4. Cryo-SFM (PromoCell), 5.Biofreeze (Biochrom, Merck Millipore). The cryovial was incubated for 10 minutes on ice before being transferred to an isopropanol container (Nalgene, Mr. Frosty). The next day, the cryovials were relocated to liquid nitrogen where they were stored for one week. Thawing was performed by transferring the cryovial as quickly as possible from the liquid nitrogen into a 37°C water bath until all ice has disappeared. Subsequently, the tissue was washed 3 times 10 minutes in pre-warmed RPMI (37°C) before being cultured in RPMI (10% FCS, pyruvate and pen/strep) at 5% CO2, 37°.
Non-frozen or thawed synovial biopsies from three patients were cultured for 24 hours before fixation in 4% formalin for 1 hour. For every condition, a minimum of 3 separate 3 mm biopsies was included. Fixation was followed by dehydration and embedding in paraffin. Sections were cut at 7 m and stained by H&E. Histology of every biopsy was scored in duplo using an arbitrary scale (01) for global morphology, appearance of the intimal lining layer, cellular and nuclear morphology, morphology of infiltrating cells, blood vessel morphology and fat cell morphology. All parameters were given a score of 1, 0.5 or 0. A score of 1 indicated no observed change, a score of 0,5 was given when the morphology was clearly distinct from non-frozen and a score of 0 was given to complete structural loss and cell death of the tissue. The mean score of these parameters is displayed in Fig 1. Pictures were taken at 400x magnification.
Non-frozen or thawed synovial biopsies were cultured overnight in a 96-wells plate in 100 l RPMI (10% FCS, pyruvate and pen/strep) as described above. For the 2,3-bis-(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide (XTT) assay, 50 l XTT reagent (Cell Proliferation Kit II, Roche) was added per well and the absorbance was measured at 450 and 655 nm after 2, 4 and 6 hours using a BioRad iMark microplate reader. Values were corrected for the reference wavelength and background signal. For the adenosine triphosphate (ATP) assay, 100 l lysis buffer (Promega, Cell-Titer Glo) was added to each well and vigorously shaken for 5 minutes before incubation for 25 minutes at room temperature. Luminescence was determined using the BMG Labtech CLARIOstar microplate reader. Values were corrected for the background signal and depicted as relative light units (RLU).
Non-frozen and thawed synovial biopsies were cultured for 24 hours and subsequently snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy fibrous tissue kit (Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherlands). Frozen synovial samples were transferred to MagNA Lyser Green Beads tubes (Roche) containing RLT lysis buffer. The tissue was disrupted in the MagNA lyser for 3 x 20 sec at 6000 rpm with one minute cooling between cycles. The remainder of the procedure was performed according to manufacturer instructions with on column DNA digestion.
The RNA integrity number (RIN) was determined directly after RNA isolation with the Agilent RNA 6000 Nano kit using the protocol provided by the manufacturer. The Nano chip was run on the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer using the 2100 Expert Software.
Microarray analysis was performed as described earlier. Briefly, total RNA was isolated from the synovial samples, using the RNeasy kit for fibrous tissues (Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherlands). Total RNA (100 ng) was hybridized to a U133Plus 2.0 oligonucleotide array (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). The arrays were scanned with a GeneChip scanner (Affymetrix) and analyzed with GeneChip operating software version 1.4 (Affymetrix). Array normalization and expression value calculations were performed with DNA-Chip Analyzer version 1.3 (www.dchip.org), using the invariant set normalization and the model-based method. The OA synovial samples and control samples were deposited in the GEO database under accession number GSE82107.
An unpublished systematic review of the literature was performed to find genes upregulated during cryopreservative stress. All Pubmed and Embase articles depicting cryopreservation and gene expression analysis of living human and animal cells and tissue were assessed and revealed six genes of which the expression is known to respond to cryopreservation conditions: two heat shock protein genes (HSPA1A, HSP27) and four apoptosis-related genes (CASP3, BAX, CD95 and MCL1). The expression of above mentioned genes was either increased or decreased (HSPA1A, MCL1) in comparison to non frozen cells or tissue. We determined their expression level after 24 hour culture.cDNA synthesis and qPCR analysis were performed as described previously. Primer sequences are listed in S1 Table.
Non-frozen and thawed synovial tissue was cultured for 24 hours in the presence or absence of LPS (100 ng/ml) and Pam3CSK4 (P3C) (1 g/ml). Cytokine concentrations (IL1, TNF, IL-6 and IL-8) were determined in culture supernatants by Luminex multianalyte technology using the Bio-Plex 200 (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) and the Bio-Plex pro human cytokine kits (Bio-Rad) according to manufacturer instructions. To measure IL-6 and IL-8 levels, culture supernatants were diluted 200-fold.
For statistical analysis GraphPad Prism version 5.03 was used. To determine significant differences between groups ANOVA was performed in combination with the Tukey test (Figs 15). To determine significant differences between non-stimulated and stimulated tissue for cytokine expression, the Student t-test was applied (Fig 6). Results are depicted as means +/- SD, and p values below 0.05 were regarded as significant.