A total of 1,006 human samples were included in the present study, and include (1) discovery cohort (DRCT; n=516 samples from 258 patients) obtained in collaboration with the CAN-BIND and Lundbeck A/S sponsored clinical trials; (2) replication cohort 1 (RPCT1, n=122 samples from 61 patients) obtained in collaboration with the GENDEP consortium; (3) replication cohort 2 (RPCT2, n=316 samples from 158 patients) obtained in collaboration with CAN-BIND; and (4) post-mortem, prefrontal cortex brain tissue (n=52) that was obtained in collaboration with the Quebec Coroner's Office and the Douglas-Bell Canada Brain Bank (Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Montreal, Canada). Ethics approval for this study was obtained from the institutional review board of the Douglas Mental Health University Institute, and written informed consent was obtained from patients or family members, as appropriate.
Our DRCT consisted of 258 well-characterized individuals (females n=178; males=80) diagnosed with MDD in a current major depressive episode (MDE) who were enrolled in a clinical trial and received treatment with either duloxetine or placebo. Duloxetine is a serotoninnorepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. For each patient, peripheral blood samples were collected at baseline and after treatment. Participants, aged 1974 years, were recruited based on a primary diagnosis of MDD and MDE lasting at least 3 months, with a severity score on the MADRS at baseline of ¥22. Participants resistant to at least two previous AD treatments or who had received electroconvulsive therapy in the 6 weeks before study beginning were excluded. Other exclusion criteria were: MDE in bipolar disorder, presence of psychotic features and recent substance use disorder. Eligible participants were equally randomized to double-blind treatment with either duloxetine (60mg) or placebo. All participants were assessed prospectively for 8 weeks, including measures of depressive severity and potential related adverse events. To quantify treatment response, we calculated percentage change of MADRS scores (from baseline to after treatment). We used percentage change to correct for the potential effects of differential baseline scores. Additionally, we classified participants as responder/nonresponder based on >50% decrease in MADRS scores from baseline. This project was approved by ethics boards of participating centres, and all participants provided written informed consent. Clinical trials are registered at www.ClinicalTrials.gov (11984A NCT00635219; 11918A NCT00599911; 13267A NCT01140906)
Our RPCT1 consisted of 61 well-characterized individuals (females n=40; males=21) diagnosed with MDD and enrolled in the GENDEP project. Adult patients with major depression of at least moderate severity according to ICD-10 (International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, 10th revision) or DSM-IV (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition) criteria were recruited at five European centres. Patients were aged 2170 years and of Caucasian European parentage. Exclusion criteria were personal and family history of schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, or current substance dependence. Eligible participants were allocated to treatment with either escitalopram or nortriptyline that represent different antidepressant classes and mechanisms of action. Patients with contraindications for one drug were offered the other. Severity of depression was assessed at baseline and after treatment by three established rating scales. The GENDEP project was approved by ethics boards of participating centres, and all participants provided written informed consent. The GENDEP trial is registered at EudraCT (no. 2004-001723-38) and ISRCTN (no. 03693000).
RPCT2 consisted of 158 well-characterized individuals (females n=98; males=60) diagnosed with MDD and enrolled in the CAN-BIND project. Adult patients with major depression of at least moderate severity according to DSM-IV-Text Revision (TR) criteria were recruited at six Canadian clinical centres. Patients were aged 1860 years. Exclusion criteria were personal and family history of schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, or current substance dependence. Eligible participants were allocated to treatment with escitalopram (1020mg per day) for 8 weeks. Severity of depression was assessed at baseline and after treatment by the MADRS. The CAN-BIND project was approved by ethics boards of participating centres, and all participants provided written informed consent. The CAN-BIND trial is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT01655706. Registered 27 July 2012.
Human post-mortem prefrontal cortex brain tissue was obtained in collaboration with the Quebec Coroner's Office and the Douglas-Bell Canada Brain Bank (Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada). A total of 52 brain samples were included in the present study. Thirty two depressed suicide completers and 20 non-suicide controls were randomly selected for miRNA analysis. All individuals were of FrenchCanadian origin, a homogeneous population with a well-documented founder effect, and were matched for refrigeration delay, age and pH. Refrigeration delay refers to the difference between the estimated time of death (determined by the pathologist through external body examination details) and the time at which the brain was refrigerated. Psychological autopsies were performed post mortem on both cases and controls by a panel of psychiatrists, and diagnoses were assigned based on DSM-IV criteria. The control group had no history of suicidal behaviour or major mood or psychotic disorders.
Peripheral blood samples were collected in PAXgene blood RNA tubes (PreAnalytix). PAXgene tubes were frozen using a sequential freezing process: tubes were stored at room temperature for 3h, transferred to 4°C overnight, followed by 68 h at 20°C and then final storage at 80°C. Total RNA (including the miRNA fraction) was isolated from whole blood using the PAXgene Blood miRNA Kit (Qiagen, Canada) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Brain tissues were processed and dissected at 4°C, then snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen before storage at 80°C. Total RNA was isolated from 40mg of frozen PFC tissue using the miRNeasy Mini Kit protocol in combination with the RNeasy MinElute Cleanup Kit (Qiagen, Canada), with no modifications. All samples were treated with DNase digestion during RNA purification using the RNase-Free DNase kit (Qiagen). RNA and miRNA yield and quality were determined using the Nanodrop 1000 (Thermo Scientific, USA) and Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, USA). The average RNA Integrity Number (RIN) value for all our samples by group were as follows: discovery cohort RIN: 8.6, replication cohort 1 RIN: 8.3, replication cohort 2 RIN: 8.2, and post-mortem brain samples RIN: 6.7.
All libraries were prepared using the Illumina TruSeq Small RNA protocol following the manufacturer's instructions with 12 cycles of PCR amplification after ligation of the 3 and 5 adapters, as described elsewhere. Libraries were purified using biotinylated magnetic AMPure beads that allow for selection of specified complementary DNA (cDNA) products bound to streptavidin. A total of 50l of amplified cDNA were mixed and purified twice with AMPure XP beads in a 1.8:1 ratio (beads/sample). This ratio allows for optimal selection of all products higher than 100 nucleotides. Library qualities were assessed using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity DNA chip, as well as quantitative real-time PCR with the KAPA library quantification kit (Kapa Biosystems, USA).
Samples were sequenced at the McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre (Montreal, Canada) using the HiSeq2500 Illumina sequencer with 50-nucleotide single-end reads. We obtained an average number of 12.1 million raw reads, with an average quality value of 37 in all libraries produced. All sequencing data were processed using CASAVA 1.8+(ref.) and extracted from FASTQ files. The Fastx_toolkit was used to trim the Illumina adapter sequences. Additional filtering based on defined cutoffs was applied to obtain high-quality data. These filters included: (1) Phred quality (Q) mean scores higher than 30, (2) reads between 15 and 40nucleotides in length, (3) adapter detection based on perfect 10-nucleotide match and (4) removal of reads without detected adapter. Additionally, we used Bowtie to align reads to the human genome (GRCh37) and ncPRO-seq in combination with miRBase (V20) to match them to known miRNA sequences. We used a detection threshold of 10 counts per miRNA (present at least in 80% of libraries tested). A total of 281 miRNAs survived our criteria and were included in the analysis. All small RNA-sequencing data were normalized with the Bioconductor  DESeq2 package using the variance-stabilizing transformation method. To identify significant microRNAs based on differential expression changes across time, we used significance analysis of microarrays method, adapted for small RNA-sequencing data (SAMSeq). SAMSeq was implemented using a two-class paired model that accounts for changes not only between groups, but also within subjects as there is a one-to-one pairing between subjects across time. We used the BenjaminiHochberg FDR correction for multiple testing set at 5% that corrects for the proportion of miRNAs likely to have been identified by chance as being significant (adjusted P values<0.05). We also tested for potential confounding effects of age, gender, race and RIN but found no significant differences across groups or time.
Small RNA-sequencing results were validated with a custom miRNA panel using circulatory miRNA assays by Firefly BioWorks. Briefly, RNA samples were hybridized to miRNA-specific probes coated on FirePlex hydrogel beads. A universal biotinylated adapter was then ligated onto the captured miRNAs and labelled with a fluorescent reporter. The level of fluorescence for a given miRNA (particle) was detected using a Guava easyCyte 8HT flow cytometer. Additionally, miR-19b-3p, Let-7i-5p and Let-7b-5p were included as endogenous controls, as they demonstrated the least variation across all samples in our sequencing results. Raw data were processed using FireCode software (Firefly BioWorks), and normalized to the geometric mean of the endogenous controls. We used a two-class paired significant analysis of microarray analysis to determine differential gene expression before and after treatment. P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Frozen plasma was thawed at room temperature, and 625l of each sample was used for total RNA extraction using the mirVana Isolation kit (ThermoFisher), following the manufacturer's instructions. Libraries were prepared using the Ion PI Template OT2 200 kit Version 3 and sequenced on an Ion Proton System (ThermoFisher). FASTQ files were downloaded from Ion Suite software and aligned using miRBase (V20) and the hg19 genome build.
Gene targets of miR-146a-5p, miR-146b-5p, miR-243p and miR-425-3p were identified using seven miRNA target prediction databases: miRWalk 2.0, miRDB, miRanda, RNA22 v2, RNAHybrid, TargetScan and DIANA Tools. We then used DAVID v6.7 to identify potential biological pathways regulated by these miRNAs. To validate our miRNA target prediction and pathway analysis, we performed a second, independent, in silico analysis for miR-146a-5p, miR-146b-5p, miR-24-3p and miR-425-3p using DIANA: miRPath. This program allows identification of common miRNA targets provided by the DIANA-microT-CDS algorithm derived from DIANA-TarBase v6.0. In addition, miRPath can perform a pathway analysis based on various levels of miRNA interactions.
For genome-wide expression analysis in peripheral blood samples, we used the Human HT-12 v4 Expression Bead Chip (Illumina). Background adjustment using variance-stabilizing transformation correction and quantile normalization was performed using the FlexArray package implemented in R (version 1.6.3). Probes with >70% absent points among all samples were removed from downstream analysis. A total of 15,000 probes were included in the final analysis. Microarray data were analysed using a two-class paired significant analysis of microarray, as well as Pearson's correlations to determine differential gene expression before and after treatment using or correlations between miRNAs and target genes, respectively. All analyses were performed using MultiExperiment Viewer 4 (MeV4, TM4 software suite). P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.
For microRNA quantification, total RNA samples were reverse transcribed and quantified using TaqMan RT-PCR microRNA assays (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Real-time PCR reactions were run in triplicate using the ABI 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR System and data were collected using the Sequence Detection System 2.4 (SDS) software (Applied Biosystems). To measure miRNA expression, we used miRNA TaqMan probes, considered to be the gold standard for miRNA quantification. Expression was calculated using the absolute quantitation standard curve method. RNU6B was used as an endogenous control as it showed expression levels that remained relatively constant with low variance and high abundance across the samples tested. All primers used are described in Supplementary Table 15. All numerical data are expressed as the means.e.m. Statistical differences among groups were analysed by Student's t-test. Statistical significance was calculated using GraphPad Prism5 and SPSS 20. P<0.05 was considered statistically significant. For messenger RNA quantification, total RNA was reverse transcribed using MMLV reverse transcriptase (Gibco) and oligo(dT)16 primers (Invitrogen). Real-time PCR reactions were run in triplicate using the ABI QuantStudio 6 Flex Real-Time PCR System and data were collected using the QuantStudio Real-Time PCR software (Applied Biosystems). Expression levels were calculated using the relative quantification method. Both -actin and GAPDH were used as endogenous controls. All primers can be found in Supplementary Table 15.
Gene expression data have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database under the accession code GSE97154 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE97154).
Male 10-week-old C57BL/6J mice, and 6-month-old CD1 retired breeders, were maintained on a 12h lightdark cycle (lights on at 0700, h) at 2225°C with ad libitum access to food and water. C57 mice were housed 5 per cage except following defeat experiments at which point mice were singly housed. All behavioural testing occurred during the animals' light cycle. The experimenter was blinded to the experimental group and the order of testing was counterbalanced during behavioural experiments. All experiments were conducted in accordance with the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.
C57BL/6J mice were subjected to CSDS for 10 consecutive days, as described previously. Briefly, C57BL/6J mice were subjected to 10 daily, 5min defeats by a novel CD1 aggressor mouse and were then housed across a plexiglass divider to allow for sensory contact. Control mice were housed in cages separated from other control mice by a plexiglass divider and were rotated to a different cage daily. Resilient and susceptible mice were identified by their respective preference for, or avoidance of, interaction with a novel mouse after 10 days of defeat in a social interaction test. Only control and susceptible mice were used for further study with imipramine.
Social-avoidance behaviour was assessed with a novel CD1 mouse in a two-stage social-interaction test. In the first 2.5min test (no target), the experimental mouse was allowed to freely explore an arena (44  44cm) containing a plexiglass and wire mesh enclosure (10  6cm) against one wall of the arena. In the second 2.5min test (target), the experimental mouse was returned to the arena with a novel CD1 mouse enclosed in the plexiglass wire mesh cage. Time spent in the ˜interaction zone' (14  26cm) surrounding the plexiglass wire mesh cage, ˜corner zones' (10  10cm) and ˜distance travelled' within the arena was measured by video tracking software (Ethovision 5.0, Noldus).
Sucrose preference was assessed using a 2% sucrose solution or tap water in 50ml tubes with stoppers fitted with ball-point sipper tubes. All animals were acclimatized to two-bottle choice conditions before testing conditions. Daily, at 1600, h, fluid levels were noted, and tube positions were interchanged. Sucrose preference was calculated as a percentage (100  volume of sucrose consumed/total volume consumed (sucrose and water)) and was averaged over 2 days of testing.
Susceptible mice were randomly assigned to treatment with either imipramine (20mg per kg, daily) or a saline control (daily) treatment for 14 days. Blood was collected from all animals via the saphenous vein before treatment. Rapid sampling from the saphenous vein was used because it causes minimal discomfort or stress to the animal. The blood was stored in RNAlater at 70°C until use. After treatment and the second round of behaviour testing, animals were killed and blood was collected via truncation into RNAlater and frozen at 70°C until use.
Then, 100ng of total RNA was used to quantify expression levels of miRNAs from animal blood samples using a probe-based miRNA expression assay (NanoString Technologies, USA). Briefly, hybridization of specific tags to target miRNAs was annealed to create multiplex probe libraries from all samples. Each miRNA of interest is identified by a ˜colour code' generated by six ordered fluorescent spots present on a reporter probe and read by the nCounter Prep Station Digital Analyzer. Control RNA was included to monitor ligation efficiency and specificity throughout each step of the reactions. In addition, this protocol does not include any amplification steps that might introduce bias to the results. Raw data were imported into NSolver Analysis Software v2.0 (NanoString technologies) and normalized to the average counts to all endogenous genes. Data were further normalized using internal positive spike-in controls to account for variability in the hybridization process. Normalized data were imported into MultiExperiment Viewer (MeV) software v.4.9 for further analysis. All numerical data are expressed as the means.e.m. Statistical differences among groups were analysed by Student's t-test. P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.
For miRNA Overexpression experiments, human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293) were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100Uml1 penicillin and 100gml1 streptomycin (Invitrogen) in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator at 37°C. For miRNA mimic treatments, cells were grown in the continuous presence of 5nM miRNA Mimic (miR-146a-5p, miR-146b-5p, miR-24-3p or miR-425-3p), 5nM miR-Mimic scramble control (AllStars Negative Control siRNA, Qiagen) or mock vehicle (HiPerFect Transfection Reagent, Qiagen) for 24h after which cell pellets were collected and both mRNA and miRNA were extracted as previously explained. All experiments were performed in triplicate. All numerical data are expressed as the means.e.m. Statistical differences among groups were analysed by one-way analysis of variance with post hoc correction and Pearson's correlation coefficients. Statistical significance was calculated using GraphPad Prism5 and SPSS 20. P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Human NPCs were treated as previously explained. To find adequate antidepressant concentrations for treatment, cells were screened for cytotoxic effects by measuring the activity of mitochondrial dehydrogenase using the 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay (Sigma-Aldrich Co) and antidepressants were applied at concentrations that showed no toxicity in the MTT test. For chronic antidepressant treatment, cells were grown in the continuous presence of 10M duloxetine, or no-drug control for 15 days, after which cell pellets were collected and both mRNA and miRNA were extracted. All experiments were performed in triplicate. All numerical data are expressed as the means.e.m. Statistical differences among groups were analysed by independent Student's t-tests. Statistical significance was calculated using GraphPad Prism5 and SPSS 20. P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Gene expression data have been deposited in the GEO database under the accession code GSE97154. All other data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE97154).
How to cite this article: Lopez, J. P. et al. MicroRNAs 146a/b-5p and 425-3p and 24-3p are markers of antidepressant response and regulate MAPK/Wnt-system genes. Nat. Commun. 8, 15497 doi: 10.1038/ncomms15497 (2017).
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.