This randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled study was registered with the Institutional Review Board of China Medical University Hospital, Taiwan on December 13, 2012. All patients provided written informed consent prior to enrollment. Patients were eligible to be included in the study if at baseline they were 2065 years, had a diagnosis of plaque-type psoriasis for ¥6 months, a Physician's Global Assessment (PGA) score of 23, <20% total body surface area (BSA) involvement, and a target plaque of ¥4 cm2.
Patients were excluded if they had non-plaque psoriasis, rebound/flare of chronic psoriasis, history of psoriatic arthritis, current drug-induced psoriasis, were pregnant/nursing/planning pregnancy (men and women), used biologics within 3 months or 5 times the half-life, received phototherapy/systemic treatment within 4 weeks, topicals within 2 weeks, any systemic immunosuppressants within 4 weeks, lithium/antimalarial/intramuscular gold within 4 weeks, tested positive for HIV/hepatitis B/C, had a history of alcohol/drug abuse, clinically-significant laboratory abnormality, sensitivity to Chinese herbs/olive oil/microcrystalline wax/Vaseline, had current signs/symptoms of severe, progressive, or uncontrolled medical conditions, or were participating concurrently in an investigational study. Patients were asked to maintain a daily diary to document treatment compliance and adverse events.
 Indigo naturalis (Qing Dai) was extracted from the aerial part of Baphicacanthus cusia and stored as dried powder. The Indigo naturalis ointment was composed of a 1:10 mixture of Indigo naturalis powder and a vehicle consisting of Vaseline: microcrystalline wax: olive oil (5:6:9 ratio) (Fig. 1c). The placebo was a mixture of blue dye powder (54.8% Indigo carmine aluminum lake [Blue #2] and 45.2% Allura Red AC aluminum lake [Red #40] powders), Vaseline, microcrystalline wax, and olive oil. Across three batches of extracts, consistent indigo (2.83%) and indirubin (0.24%) concentration levels were maintained. To maintain the blind, both the Indigo naturalis and the placebo-control agents had a blue color (Fig. 1c). The blue dye of Indigo naturalis is not considered an active ingredient. Both study agents were manufactured at the same Good Manufacturing Practice facility (Sheng Chang Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Taoyuan, Taiwan). High-performance liquid chromatography was used for quality control of the final product. 
Sample size was calculated using the hypothesis that a decrease in Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) scores at week 8 would be observed following Indigo naturalis treatment. It has been reported that a sample size of 7 placebo patients and 12 Indigo naturalis patients was needed to achieve a statistical power of 90% at 0.05 level of significance. Assuming a patient follow-up rate of 0.9, it was determined that at least 8 placebo patients and 16 Indigo naturalis patients would be needed to reach statistical significance.
A total of 24 patients with moderate psoriasis were randomized 1:2 at week 0 to placebo (n = 8) or Indigo naturalis (n = 16) (Fig. 1a). Prior to week 8, one patient (placebo) discontinued due to gout. Patients were given and instructed to use the topical ointment twice daily for 8 weeks or until complete skin clearance was achieved, whichever occurred first. The amount of ointment used was assessed by estimating the surface area of each psoriatic lesion. To calculate the number of fingertip units (FTUs) to be used, 1 FTU = 0.5 g = 100 cm2 of surface area. In the 4-week screening period prior to treatment, whole blood, lesional, and nonlesional biopsy samples were collected. At week 0, patients received their first treatment. Subsequent visits occurred at weeks 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 9. Final whole blood and lesional samples were collected at week 8 (Fig. 1b).
Safety and tolerability were evaluated through week 9. Safety evaluations included adverse event assessments, physical exams, electrocardiogram measurements, and hematology and blood chemistry analyses. Tolerability was evaluated through week 9 using: PASI to measure the severity of psoriasis ranging from a score of 0 (no psoriasis) to 72 (very severe); BSA involvement with psoriasis; PGA scores ranging from 0 to 5: cleared (0), minimal (1), mild (2), moderate (3), marked (4), and severe (5); and Overall Target Plaque Severity Scores (OTPSS) that measures plaque severity ranging from a score of 0 (no evidence of disease) to 8 (very severe).
Two adjacent 4-mm punch biopsy specimens of lesional and nonlesional skin were obtained from each patient at week 0. A repeat biopsy was taken from the same lesional area 8 weeks after treatment with Indigo naturalis or placebo. Ribonucleic acid (RNA) was amplified using the NuGen Ovation RNA Amplification System (Nugen, San Carlos, CA). The fragmented cDNA was hybridized to Affymetrix HT HG-U133 + PM Array (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA).
Microarray data were analyzed using ArrayStudio (Omicsoft, Cary, NC). Overall, 68 samples passed quality control analysis including 23 nonlesional samples and 24 lesional samples at baseline, and 21 lesional samples at week 8. Group comparisons were assessed using a general linear model (fold-change cutoff = 1.5) followed by multiple test correction using false discovery rate methodology (cutoff = 0.05). Pathway level analysis of differentially expressed genes (DEG) was conducted using enrichment analysis in Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (http://www.ingenuity.com).
Normal human adult keratinocytes (Lonza) were seeded into 48-well culture plates and cultured to passage three with an approximate density of 7080%. Keratinocytes were stimulated with IL-17A (100 ng/mL) (R&D Systems, Inc., Minneapolis, MN) and treated with varying concentrations of isatin, tryptanthrin, and indirubin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), and a control compound, PD 0325901. PD 0325901 is a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitor; a similar compound has been demonstrated to inhibit IL-17-induced cytokine release. Cell viability was confirmed using the PrestoBlue assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Tryptanthrin showed no impact on cell viability at all testing concentrations. Tissue culture supernatants were analyzed for pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and IL-8 using MesoScale Discovery V-plex assay (MesoScale Discovery, Rockville, MD). Data were analyzed using Graphpad Prism v5.0 (http://www.graphpad.com).
Descriptive statistics such as mean, median, standard deviation, and proportion were used. No imputation of missing observations was performed. Safety was assessed by summarizing the incidence and type of adverse events through week 9. Bivariate statistical analysis such as the Chi-square test or Fishers exact test for categorical variables and two-sample t test for continuous variables were employed to evaluate the differences in baseline demographic and outcomes variables between active treatment and placebo groups.