Data on expression levels of CD38 on NK cells, B cells, T cells, and monocytes were derived from 17 relapsed or refractory MM patients treated with daratumumab monotherapy (16 mg/kg) in the GEN501 study (NCT00574288) and from 9 patients treated in part 2 of the GEN503 study (daratumumab 16 mg/kg in combination with lenalidomide-dexamethasone (DRd); NCT1615029). In addition, in GEN503 patients, CD38 expression on MM cells was determined before start of therapy and approximately 16 weeks after initiation of treatment, and at the time of progression.
Briefly, in the GEN501 study, patients had MM requiring systemic therapy and relapsed from or refractory to at least 2 prior therapies. In part 2 of the GEN503 study, patients refractory to lenalidomide were excluded and patients with ¥1 prior line of therapy were included. In both studies patients had age ¥18 years; life expectancy ¥3 months; Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 2; and measurable disease. Exclusion criteria included other malignancies; uncontrolled infections; cardiovascular and respiratory conditions; or meningeal involvement of MM.
For the analysis of CD38 expression on MM cells directly after the first daratumumab infusion, we obtained blood samples from 8 patients before and immediately after the first infusion of daratumumab and prior to administration of any combinational treatment.
Study site ethics committees or institutional review boards approved the protocols, which were conducted according to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki, the International Conference on Harmonization, and the Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice. All patients gave written informed consent.
Daratumumab was provided by Janssen Pharmaceuticals. Human IgG1-b12 (Genmab), a human mAb against an innocuous antigen (HIV-1 gp120), was used as an isotype control as described previously.
MM cell lines (UM9 and UM9-CD38) and the lymphoma cell line (Daudi) were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Invitrogen), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Lonza) and antibiotics (100 units/mL penicillin, 100 g/ml streptomycin; both Life Technologies) as previously described. UM9 was obtained after prolonged in vitro culture of the BM aspirate of a MM patient. Daudi was purchased from the American Tissue Culture Collection (ATCC, USA). Mycoplasma testing was performed every month by using real-time PCR (Microbiome, Netherlands), and cell lines were authenticated by partial HLA typing carried out maximal 6 months before the most recent experiment.
The MM cell line UM9 was transduced with the human CD38 gene to obtain CD38 expression levels comparable to primary myeloma cells. For this, the amphotropic Phoenix packaging cell line (Phoenix Ampho) was transfected, using calcium phosphate precipitation, with the pQCXIN vector in which the gene encoding human CD38 was inserted. This cell line is referred to as UM9-CD38.
BM-localized MM cells were identified and analysed for CD38 expression levels by staining 1106 cells with CD38 V450, CD138 PercP-Cy5.5, CD56 Pe-Cy7 (all Becton Dickinson), HuMax-003 FITC (this antibody binds to an epitope distinct from the epitope bound by daratumumab; Genmab/Janssen Pharmaceuticals; HuMax-003 FITC was used for analysis of CD38 expression in sequential samples obtained before, during, and after treatment with daratumumab), CD45 Pacific Orange (Invitrogen), CD19 APC-A750 (Beckman Coulter, Immunotech) combined with cytoplasmic staining for immunoglobulin light chains using monoclonal anti-kappa APC (Becton Dickinson) and polyclonal anti-lambda PE (DAKO). These samples were analyzed within 24 hours from the time the bone marrow aspirate was collected. As previously described, expression levels of CD38 were stable during the first 48 hours after BM sampling.
Quantitation of circulating MM cells and analysis of their CD38 expression level, was performed by the incubation of 35 106 cells with sufficient amounts of antibodies in the combinations described above for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Cells were then washed with PBS, suspended in 2 ml of PBS/human serum albumin and directly analyzed by flow cytometry. MM cells were enumerated by using the calculated ratio of MM cells and B cells in the sample and the established absolute number of B cells in the same blood sample using single platform analysis. These samples were analyzed within 24 hours from the time the blood sample was collected.
CD38 expression on immune cell subsets was determined on cryopreserved peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), isolated by density-gradient centrifugation. At the time of analysis thawed PBMCs were re-suspended in FACS medium (PBS/0.05% Azide/0.1% HSA). A total of 2105 cells were stained with relevant fluorescent conjugated monoclonal antibodies to identify by multicolor flow cytometry various immune cell populations and their CD38 expression. The following antibodies were used: CD45 KO, CD16 PE, CD56 PC7 (all Beckman Coulter), CD3 V450, CD19 APC-H7, CD14 PerCP, CD4 APC-H7, CD8 PerCP-Cy5.5, CD14 PE, CD44 APC-H7, CD54 APC, CD138 PE (all Becton Dickinson), CD138 APC (IQP), and CD49d PE (Biolegend). All samples were additionally stained with the anti-CD38 antibody, HuMax-003 FITC, which binds to an epitope distinct from the epitope bound by daratumumab.
Flow cytometry was performed using a 3-laser Canto II flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Mountain view, CA). Fluorescent labeled beads (CS&T beads, Becton Dickinson) were used to monitor the performance of the flow cytometer and verify optical path and stream flow. This procedure enables controlled standardized results and allows the determination of long-term drifts and incidental changes within the flow cytometer. No changes were observed which could affect the results. Compensation beads were used to determine spectral overlap, compensation was automatically calculated using Diva software.
Comparisons between variables were performed using two-tailed (paired) Students t-test, or Mann-Whitney U test or Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test in case the data do not follow a normal distribution. P-values below 0.05 were considered significant.
Additional methods are presented in the Supplemental Data.