The FDA approved drug library (Enzo) was kept at 80°C. Aliquots were prepared on clear 96 well plates using the Liquidator (Qiagen). Disulfiram for further analyses was purchased from Sigma.
The human cell line SH-SY5Y was maintained at humidified air (95%), 5% CO2, 37°C, and cultured in DMEM/F12 (Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany) supplemented with 10% FCS and 1% Glutamine (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA).
Cells were seeded at a density of 45 000 cells per well of a white glass-bottom 96 well plate (Greiner Bio-OneGmbH, Frickenhausen, Germany) in OptiMEM (Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany) and incubated with the substances of the FDA-approved library. Cell viability was assessed using the Cell Titer Glo Assay (Promega). Concentrations that were found toxic (decrease in viability of >20% in comparison to solvent control) or pro-proliferative (increase in viability >20%) were reduced until appropriate.
For measuring a potential protective effect of disulfiram on A-beta treatment of cells, SH-SY5Y cells were seeded at a density of 38 000 cells per well of a 96 well plate (Greiner Bio-OneGmbH, Frickenhausen, Germany) in culture medium supplemented with solvent (DMSO), human A-beta42 peptides (2.5µM, Anaspec) or peptides combined with 2.2µM disulfiram for 48h. Subsequently, MTT reagent was added (5µl of 5mg/ml stock solution) and viability assessed as described before.
The dual luciferase reporter assay was performed as described previously. In brief, a reporter vector was used for simultaneously detecting human BACE-1 promoter activity and human ADAM10 promoter activity with the dual luciferase reporter kit (Promega) after incubating the cells for 48h. Substances were diluted following results from the toxicity assay and the assay was at least performed three times independently for each substance. Both promoter sequences as well as the single reporter vector for ADAM10 promoter are described in a former publication. The reporter vector for murine ADAM10 promoter activity has also been reported previously.
Cells were seeded on 12-well plates at a density of 500 000 per well and incubated with the substances as indicated for 48h. Cell supernatant from a 5h secretion period was collected and soluble proteins precipitated via TCA. Cells were harvested in PBS, protein content determined, and half of the supernatant or 20µg proteins subjected to SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Proteins were blotted onto nitrocellulose and blocked with 0.2% I-Block (Thermo Fisher Scientific) solution including 0.05% Tween20. Primary antibodies were as follows: ADAM10 rabbit polyclonal antibody (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), ADAM17 rabbit polyclonal antibody (Chemicon, Merck), BACE-1 rabbit monoclonal antibody (D10E5, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), APP N-terminal mouse monoclonal antibody (for detection of sAPP-alpha, 6E10, Covance, Madison, WI, USA), anti-sAPP-beta (Covance, Madison, WI, USA) or APP C-terminal antibody. As a loading control, GAPDH was detected (14C10, Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA). Blots were incubated with respective secondary antibody coupled with horseradish peroxidase (Thermo Scientific, Karlsruhe, Germany) and signals obtained by applying SuperSignal West Femto chemiluminescent substrate (Thermo Scientific, Karlsruhe, Germany) were captured using a CCD-camera imaging system (Raytest, Straubenhardt, Germany).
The amyloid aggregation assay was conducted in 50mM Tris/150mM NaCl (pH7.2) supplemented with 125µM Thioflavin T (Sigma) and 0.1mg/ml human AggreSure beta-Amyloid (142) (Anaspec) in black 384 well plates. Fluorescence was measured in a Fluostar Omega (BMG Labtech, Cary,NC, USA) (Ex/Em=440/484nm) to analyze A-beta aggregation.
The luminescent GSK3-beta assay was performed as recommended by the vendor (Promega).
Male 5xFAD mice (Jackson Lab) were crossbred with C57BL/6J female mice for maintenance. Non-transgenic female offspring was used as control. All animals were group-housed in cages in a 12h light/dark cycle with food and water available ad libitum unless otherwise stated (three to five animals/cage). All procedures were performed in accordance with the European Communities Council Directive regarding care and use of animals for experimental procedures and were approved by local authorities (Landesuntersuchungsamt Rheinland-Pfalz; approval number G14-1-087).
Mice aged 3 months were assigned randomly into the control group (solvent, DMSO) or the disulfiram group (26mg/kg per day). Disulfiram (stock solution of 100mg/ml, kept in aliquots at 20°C) was diluted freshly in DMSO to 0.8mg/150µl injection solution. Animals were injected i.p. at a fixed time in the morning of two consecutive days.
For the assessment of nest building capability, animals were single-caged and habituated to the nesting material used for scoring (Sizzle Pet Nesting Material, Claus GmbH, Germany; 10g per cage) for 24h in the presence of their former nest building material (paper towel). Animals then received fresh nesting material for three days. Subsequently, animals were deprived for 24h to enhance nest building motivation and also received their first injection. On day six, mice were injected the second time and cages were supplemented with fresh nesting material to allow nest building for overnight. The following morning, quality of the nest was scored as described by Deacon (e.g. 0: no nest built; 5: perfectly closed dome built). Additionally, the nesting material that has not been introduced into the nest was weighed.
For the novel object recognition (NOR) test, mice were injected on day one and two. On day two they were additionally habituated for 6min to the Y-maze which was used for the NOR test. On the third day, mice were represented in a first session for 6min to two identical objects in two arms of the Y-maze. Two hours later, one of the objects was replaced by a novel object and mice allowed to explore the maze for another 6min. A computerized video system registered moving-path and presence in the defined areas (non-displaced (NDO) and displaced object (DO)) automatically (hardware consisted of an IBM-type AT computer combined with a video digitizer and a CCD video camera). The software used for data acquisition and analysis was EthoVision XT release 8.5 (Noldus Information Technology, Utrecht, Netherlands). Analysis of the data was performed using the discrimination index (time (DO-NDO)/ time (DO+NDO)).
Human healthy controls and patients were recruited from the Clinic of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy (Mainz) or from the CIMH (Mannheim). Exclusion criteria for the patients were a diagnosed Alzheimer dementia and a treatment with disulfiram less than four weeks before baseline assessment. Patients were included that were treated with disulfiram for alcohol relapse prevention. Exact treatment schedule was chosen by the medicating physician. In general, a dosage of 1500, 1000 and 500mg is used for the first three days, and then a dose of 500mg three times a week is prescribed. Patients that were compliant for 14 days were included in the study. All patients gave informed consent for study participation; the study has been approved by local authorities (Landesrztekammer Rheinland-Pfalz), and is registered with clinical trials.gov (NCT03212599). All experiments were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations.
Mice were anaesthetized with isofluran and sacrificed by decapitation. Truncal blood was mixed with RNA later (Qiagen, Hilden) and urine was collected. One brain hemisphere was drop fixed in 4% formaldehyde for IHC and the other hemisphere immediately cut in cubes and submerged in RNA later for preservation or snap frozen for zinc measurements and assessment of Acetylcholine esterase levels by the method of Ellman (see Suppl. Figure 2). In addition, sections of the gut were taken to assess Acetylcholine esterase levels. All samples were stored at 80°C before usage despite IHC samples.
For human blood, samples were collected in a 2.5ml EDTA monovette (Sarstedt, Nmbrecht, Germany), inverted three times, stored upright and processed within maximal 20minutes after puncture. 0.5ml blood was pipetted to 1.3ml RNAlater and mixed by inverting. Samples were stored at 80°C before further use.
Snap frozen hemispheres were grinded manually under nitrogen cooling and 1mg material suspended in water used for assessment of zinc amount with the fluorogenic zinc quantification kit (Abcam). Values were corrected for background fluorescence calculated as ng/mg tissue wet weight. Urine was used undiluted and obtained values corrected for autofluorescence.
SH-SY5Y cells were seeded on 12 well plates at a density of 500 000 cells per well and medium was exchanged 5h after passage with medium containing 2.2µM disulfiram or solvent (DMSO). 24h later, cell supernatant was exchanged by 1ml fresh drug-containing medium per well and secreted proteins were collected for 16h. 200µl of cell supernatant were subjected to human A-beta 1-x ELISA as recommended by the vendor (IBL).
Brain tissue grinded under nitrogen cooling was suspended in extraction buffer (100mg/800µl; 10mM Tris HCl pH7.4; 100mM NaCl, 1% TritonX100, 0.1% SDS, 1mM EDTA, Protease-Inhibitor without EDTA (RocheMini complete)) and homogenized with a tissue mill (TissueLyzer, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and stainless steel beads (5mm, Qiagen). The suspension was incubated on ice with vortexing every 10min for 30min, centrifuged (13 000g, 4°C, 10min) and the supernatant diluted 1:200 in standard diluent buffer of the ELISA kit (Human Abeta42, Invitrogen, Camarillo, CA, USA). The assay was performed as recommended by the vendor.
SH-SY5Y cells were seeded on 24 well plates at a density of 260 000 cells per well and medium was exchanged 5h after passage with medium containing 2.2µM disulfiram or solvent (DMSO). After 48h of incubation, cells were scraped and collected by centrifugation (13 000g, 4°C, 3min). The cell pellet was resuspended in 20µl assay buffer (AnaSpec) and incubated for 15min on ice. 8µl of cell suspension were supplemented with 2µl DMSO or GM6001 solution in black 384 well plates.
Tissue was prepared as described for A-beta ELISA. The pellet from centrifugation was washed in 200µl PBS with protease inhibitors. 50µl of tissue suspension was pelleted (3min, 3,000g, 4°C) and washed two-times in assay buffer provided by the vendor (100µl, AnaSpec, Seraing, Belgium) with 10min incubation on ice. 5µl of tissue suspension was supplemented by 3µl assay buffer and 2µl of DMSO or GM6001 solution in black 384 well plates.
For both, cell suspension or tissue lysate, 10µl of pre-warmed substrate solution were added and kinetics measured by a FluoStarOmega (BMG Labtech; 60min measurement with measuring every 2min after orbital shaking, 37°C). Slopes of fluorescent signal-increase over time as measured by Em485nm/Exc520nm for non-inhibited reaction (DMSO) were corrected by values obtained from inhibited reaction (GM6001) to make sure that only substrate digestion by metalloproteinases is taken into account.
IHC sections were prepared and stained with anti-APP antibody 6E10 (Covance) as described previously. Two sections per mouse were used for densitometric analysis in a total magnification of 40: five areas were determined to be measured as shown in Fig. 6a. All areas were corrected for the value of the background area. For cortical tissue, two distinct areas were analyzed and integrated into a mean value. Experimenters were blinded for the treatment of the mice during analysis.
Total RNA was extracted according to the manufacturers instructions (RNA II, Qiagen, Hilden). For human and murine blood, RNA was extracted with the RiboPure Blood Kit (Ambion) as recommended by the manufacturer. 20ng (mouse blood) or 100ng RNA were used for quantitative Real-time PCR with the QuantiTectSYBRGreen Kit (Qiagen, Hilden) performed in a StepOnePlusCycler (Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany). Primers were as follows: Adam10 (QT00106351), Bace-1 (QT00493948), murine 18SrRNA (QT02448075), ADAM10 (QT00032641), PGK-1 (QT00013776). Levels of mRNA were normalized to the mRNA levels of the house keeping genes (18SrRNA/PGK-1) using a standard curve.
Quantitative analysis of Western blot chemiluminescent signals or chromogenic signals from IHC sections was carried out with AIDA image analyzer 4.26 software (Raytest, Straubenhardt, Germany). Microscopic pictures of the IHCs were acquired by an EVOS XL microscope (Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany). Scale bars were inserted by using ImageJ software.
For comparison of two groups, data were analyzed by Students t-test, followed by Bonferronis correction. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed for three or more groups, followed by the LSD post hoc test. P-values<0.05 were considered statistically significant and results were represented as meanSD (cell culture/in vitro experiments) orSEM (animal experiments/clinical study). Data analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 6 (Graph Pad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA).
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.