The study was approved by institutional review boards (Ethikkommission Ethikausschuss 1 am Campus Charit©-Mitte, Dementia competence network, EA1/182/10; BIH CRG 2a, EA2/118/15). Written informed consent was obtained from all patients participating in the study. CSF from patients with AD, FTLD, or MDE, and healthy controls were obtained from a local and a multicenter biomaterial bank. For patients diagnosed with AD, FTLD, or MDE neuropsychometric and biochemical characteristics as determined in the CSF were consistent with the diagnoses (Tables 1 and 2). Clinical diagnoses were determined in consensus conferences according to DSM-V, taking into account the patients history, neurological and psychiatric findings, neuropsychological test results, CSF biomarkers (t-Tau, Amyloid-142) and cranial magnet resonance imaging. CSF cut-off values (A142  600 pg/ml, t-Tau ¥350 pg/ml) have previously been determined in-house performing ROC analyses on a data set comprising clinically validated diagnoses (80% for both sensitivity and specificity). To ensure reliability of biomarker values, CSF was collected and analyzed strictly according to protocols described elsewhere. Briefly, lumbar puncture was performed with the patient in a sitting position. Exactly 12 ml CSF were collected in polypropylene tubes. Tubes were shaken, and CSF was centrifuged immediately after collection (1,600 g, room temperature, 10 min), aliquoted (250 l), and frozen within 30 min after lumbar puncture. The material was stored at 80°C and was at no time thawed/refrozen. Sampling and storage conditions were identical for samples from all patient groups.
Total RNA was isolated using the mirVana PARIS RNA Isolation kit (Life Technologies), as described previously. Briefly, 400 l of CSF were diluted with equal volumes of 2x denaturing solution before equal volumes of acid-phenol:chloroform were added. Samples were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min. The aqueous phase was mixed with 1.25 volumes of 100% ethanol. After sample application to a filter cartridge, washing was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. RNA was eluted in 100 l of RNAse-free water. RNA was quantified by nanophotometry (Implen).
3040 ng of total RNA of CSF samples from AD, FTLD, and MDE patients as well as controls were reverse transcribed using the TaqMan MicroRNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems). In case of miRNA isolation from exosomes 5 l RNA were used. MiRNA levels expressed as CT-values were determined by real time PCR (qPCR) using TaqMan MicroRNA assay for hsa-let-7a, hsa-let-7b, hsa-let-7c, hsa-let-7d, hsa-let-7e, hsa-let-7f, hsa-let-7g, hsa-let-7i, hsa-miR-98, hsa-miR-16, hsa-miR-24, and hsa-miR-124 according to the manufacturer's instructions on a 7500 Fast Real Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems). Expression levels of miRNAs in the CSF from one individual patient were determined in parallel on one single PCR plate. Quantitative miRNA levels expressed as absolute copy numbers were determined using TaqMan MicroRNA assay on a StepOnePlus Real Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems). Copy numbers were calculated implementing a standard curve using synthetic oligoribonucleotides and plotting CT-values versus copy number, a CT-value of 40 corresponding to a copy number of 0, as described previously. qPCR was performed in triplicates. Subsequent evaluation was performed, as previously described. One value was excluded from the triplicate if CT-values differed ¥1. In case all three values had a CT-difference ¥1 or at least two out of three replicas had a CT of 40 the respective miRNA was defined as not detected and was graphically depicted with CT 40.
Isolation of extracellular vesicles from CSF was performed with the Total Exosome Isolation Kit according to the manufacturers instruction (Life Technologies). Briefly, 200 l (for RNA isolation) or 400 l (for western blotting) of CSF were thawed on ice and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 30 min at 4°C. One volume of exosome isolation reagent was added to the supernatant and mixed by vortexing before incubating for 1 h at 4°C. Samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 1 h at 4°C. Supernatant was aspirated. The complete volume of supernatant was used for RNA isolation. The pellet containing extracellular vesicles was re-suspended in either 200 l PBS (for RNA isolation; Total Exosome RNA and Protein Isolation Kit, Life Technologies) or 20 l ice-cold Exosome Resuspension Buffer (for western blotting).
Western blotting was performed, as previously described. Anti-Flotillin-1 and anti-CD63 antibodies (both at 1:250, BD Biosciences) were used.
The following native oligoribonucleotides were synthesized by Purimex DNA/RNA-Oligonucleotide, Grebenstein, Germany: let-7a, 5-UGAGGUAGUAGGUUGUAUAGUU-3; let-7b, 5-UGAGGUAGUAGGUUGUGUGGUU-3; let-7c, 5 UGAGGUAGUAGGUUGUAUGGUU-3; let-7d, 5-AGAGGUAGUAGGUUGCAUAGUU-3; let-7e, 5-UGAGGUAGGA GGUUGUAUAGUU-3; let-7f, 5-UGAGGUAGUAGAUUGUAUAGUU-3; let-7g, 5-UGAGGUAGUAGUUUGUACAGUU-3; let-7i, 5-UGAGGUAGUAGUUUGUGCUGUU-3; mutated oligoribonucleotide (mut. oligo), 5-UGAGGUAGAAGGAUAUAAGGAU-3.
Cortical neurons were generated from C57BL/6 mice and cultured, as described previously. SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells (ATCC) were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (vol/vol) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin.
Various doses of oligoribonucleotides and other reagents were added to cell cultures for various durations, as indicated. Imiquimod and DAPI were obtained from InvivoGen and Roche, respectively. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated biotinylated UTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) staining of cells was conducted using the In Situ Cell Death Detection kit, TMR red (Roche). For each condition, experiments were performed in duplicates.
Immunostaining was performed, as described previously. NeuN, neurofilament, and microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) antibodies were used (all 1:1,000, Millipore). Alexa fluor 488 goat-anti-mouse and Alexa fluor 568 goat-anti-rabbit (both 1:500, Life Technologies) were used as secondary antibodies. Fluorescence microscopy was performed on an Olympus BX51 microscope.
NeuN-positive cells were quantified by analyzing six high-power fields per coverslip. Numbers of NeuN-positive cells observed for each condition were compared with control conditions. Results were expressed as relative neuronal viability. TUNEL-positive cells were quantified in six high-power fields per coverslip and were expressed relatively to NeuN-positive cells in the same high power field as fold change to negative control.
SH-SY5Y cells were fixed, permeabilized using the BD Cytofix/CytopermTM Kit (BD Biosciences), and stained with anti-TLR7 Alexa488 antibody (Imgenex). An Alexa 488-conjugated isotype served as negative control. Data were collected on a BD FACSCanto II and analyzed by FlowJo Version 9.5.2.
Data are expressed as indicated in the figures. Statistics as indicated in the figure legends were calculated using GraphPad Prism version 5.0 for Mac OS X (GraphPad Software, San Diego, USA). Otherwise, the statistical software SPSS 24 was used. In detail, data were described as mean or median and standard deviation. Statistical differences between two groups of individuals or patients were determined by the Students t test. Statistical differences over multiple groups of individuals or patients were determined using the one-way ANOVA test followed by Sidaks multiple comparison post hoc test of patient group vs. control group. Adjusted p-values for patient and control groups were determined by ANCOVA with gender and age as covariates. Statistical differences over all tested conditions in vitro were determined using the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn´s Multiple comparison post hoc test of total vs. fraction or negative control vs. treatment. Differences were considered statistically significant when p < 0.05.