Samples were collected from patients with relapsed CLL or small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL) treated with lenalidomide under a phase 2 investigator-initiated study (NCT00465127). Between May 2007 and February 2010, 33 patients received lenalidomide at 10 or 20 mg daily cycled 3 weeks on, 3 weeks off for up to 8 cycles. The study was approved by the institutional review board at the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, and conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. All patients provided written informed consent. The primary endpoint was overall response after 4 cycles as assessed by modified International Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia criteria. Lymphadenopathy was assessed by the sum of the product of the greatest diameters of representative lymph nodes with computed tomography (CT). Samples for in vitro studies were collected from patients with treatment na¯ve CLL after obtaining written informed consent (NCT00923507). Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and LN core biopsies were collected prior to and on day 8 of therapy and stored as previously described.
Total RNA was isolated from CD19+ selected PBMCs and LN core biopsies. Microarray analysis was performed on Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 chips (Santa Clara, CA) as described. Biotin-labeled RNA (20 g) was fragmented to ~200 bp and hybridized to U133 Plus 2.0 chips for 16 hours, washed, and stained on a fluidics station. Affymetrix Expression Console software was used to calculated signal intensities and present calls on the hybridized chips. The signal intensity values of the probe sets were normalized by Robust Multi-Array Average (RMA) across the chips. Only probe sets with a present signal on > 5 arrays were selected for analysis. The expression of multiple probe sets corresponding to a gene was averaged. Two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was applied to evaluate patient and lenalidomide treatment effects on day 8 relative to day 0. The Benjamini and Hochberg method was used to correct for multiple testing. Cluster and Tree View (Eisen Laboratory, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Ingenuity Systems, Redwood, CA accessed June 8, 2018) were used for gene expression analysis. The microarray dataset is available on the NCBI GEO website under accession GSE112953. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE112953
Previously described CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell gene signatures were used for T cell subsets analysis.
Enumeration of CD3+ cells and intracellular staining for IFN was performed as previously described. IFN in the serum was measured using Mesoscale (Gaithersburg, MD).
LN core biopsies were stained with CD3, CD4 and CD8 (Dako, Carpinteria, CA). The number of CD3+ cells was scored in five representative high-power fields by a trained pathologist blinded to the samples. Images were captured at 400x fold magnification on an Olympus Bx41 microscope (Center Valley, PA).
TCR - and -chain deep sequencing was performed to assess lenalidomide-induced clonal expansion of T cells in LN as previously described. In brief, 1 g of total RNA (only 0.75 g of total RNA available at pre-treatment from subject L2) was used for PCR-based amplification of TRA or TRB gene products with adapter-conjugated primer sets. The template library was amplified by Nextera XT DNA sample prep kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Subsequently, the prepared library was analyzed using MiSeq Reagent 600-cycle kit v3 and MiSeq system (Illumina). After deep sequencing, each V, (D), J and C segment of TCR - and -chains were mapped to reference sequences in IMGT/GENE-DB and assigned for determination of the complement determining region 3 (CDR3) amino acid sequence as previously described. The diversity index (inverse Simpsons index) of CDR3 sequences was calculated to assess overall diversity and clonality in the TCR  and  clonotypes.
PBMC (5105 cells/mL) were cultured for 3 weeks in RPMI, supplemented with penicillin, streptomycin and glutamine (all Gibco, Grand Island, NY), fetal calf serum (10%, Sigma, St Louis, MO), IL2 (100 u/ml), IL7 (50 IU/ ml) and IL15 (5 IU/ ml, all Peprotech, Rocky Hill, NJ) and in presence (2 M, dissolved in DMSO (0.1%) or absence (DMSO 0.1%) of lenalidomide (Sequoia Research Products, Berkshire, UK). Cells were once stimulated at a 1:1 ratio with irradiated PBMCs (25 Gy). Then CD3 negative selection (Robosep, Stemcell Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada) was performed. CD19+ cells were obtained from autologous PBMCs, cultured with lenalidomide (2 M) or vehicle (DMSO) for 48 hours (CD19 positive selection, Miltenyi, Auburn CA). CD3+ cells were stained with 0.5 M CFSE (carboxyfluorescein succinimidylester Gibco) as described. CD3+ cells and CD19+ cells were co-cultured at a 1:1 ratio at 1106 cells in RPMI alone (no cytokines, no lenalidomide, no fetal calf serum, 96 well plate). Flow cytometric analysis was performed at 72 hours post-stimulation (Fortessa, BD BioSciences, San Jose, CA) following manufacturers instructions. The following experiments were set up: CD3, CD3 (lenalidomide treated), CD3/ CD19, CD3 (lenalidomide treated)/ CD19, CD3 / CD19 (lenalidomide treated), CD3 (lenalidomide treated) / CD19 (lenalidomide treated). Intracellular staining was described before (BD Cytofix/ Cytoperm plus, Fixation/ Permeabilization solution kit with BD GolgiPlug, BD BioSciences, San Jose, CA). 5105 cells were stained with the following mouse anti-human antibodies: Vivid and CD14 Pacific Blue, CD19 APC, CD4 V500, CD8 H7APC, IFNg PE-Cy7 (all BD BioScience PharMingen, San Jose, CA), and CD3 Efluor605 (Thermofisher eBioscience, San Diego, CA).
Paired t-test was used to compare pre- and on-treatment samples and unpaired t-test was used to compare responders and non-responders. A p-value of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical analyses were performed using JMP 13 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).