The Cholesterol and Pharmacogenetics (CAP) clinical trial was comprised of 944 participants (609 self-identified whites and 335 self-identified blacks) treated with 40mg/day simvastatin for 6 weeks (Clinical Trials.gov identifier NCT00451828). Plasma lipid measures were quantified twice before statin treatment, and after 4 and 6 weeks on-treatment, with delta LDL calculated as the difference of the average pre-treatment vs. the average post-treatment values. All experimental protocols were approved by the institutional review boards at Childrens Hospital Oakland Research Institute and at UCLA and UCSF, where the clinical trial was performed. Lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) were generated from each study participant as previously described. Informed consent for participation in the statin clinical trial and the use of cell lines was obtained from each study subject. All methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations.
LCL lines from CAP participants were exposed to 2µM activated simvastatin (provided by Merck Inc., Whitehouse Station, NJ) or control buffer for 24hours and total RNA was extracted as previously described. Indexed, strand-specific, paired-end Illumina sequencing libraries were prepared by LabCorp (formerly Covance, Seattle, WA) as previously described. Sequences were aligned using TopHat2 and adjusted for library size and variance stabilized using DESeq2 as previously described. Quality control checks were performed as previously described, except that 7 samples in experimental batch 1 were included here but excluded previously.
Differential RNA-seq expression was determined by subtracting the control-treated variance stabilized data from the statin-treated variance stabilized data and the resulting expression changes for each gene were quantile normalized and adjusted for experiment batch 1 using regression. To adjust expression differences for unmeasured confounders, principal component analysis (PCA) was adopted as previously described. Among the PCs of a covariance matrix between samples sorted by the proportion of explained variation in the original matrix, up to 25 PCs were selected such that adding another PC would explain less than 0.5% of the variation. PCs 1 through 25 were progressively regressed out, and the residuals from each regression were quantile normalized and used as the change in expression level of each gene.
To identify signature genes from 25 each of high and low European American responders, we used empirical Bayes moderated t-statistics as in Kim et al.. Starting from a relative difference d(i) which is defined aswhere  and  are defined as the average level of expression for gene i in the high (H) and low (L) responder groups, respectively, and s(i) is the standard deviation of repeated measurements, we introduced varying s0 values in the denominator to stabilize the variance of d(i) irrespective of the gene expression level using an empirical Bayes approach. A more detailed description on this method has been previously reported.
Radial-basis SVMs were used for training and predicting 12 high and 14 low African American responders in the SVM classification models. The performance of the models was evaluated by randomly splitting the data into 10 sets, with 9 assigned as the training set and the tenth as the testing set. The model was trained using the training set and applied to the testing set for prediction. This process was repeated 5000 times and the prediction power of the model was estimated based on the 5000 testing sets. The SVM function in the R package (kernlab) was used to implement the models with default parameter settings. For the SVM, the radial basis kernel was chosen due to its superior performance in the cross-validation results. The prediction performance was evaluated by ROC curve analysis and quantitated by AUC using the ROCR package in R.
To measure statin-induced changes of in vivo clinical phenotypes for correlation analyses, delta log measures were calculated as the log (average value of each phenotype on treatment) minus the log (average of value of each phenotype two pre-treatment). The distribution of the plasma LDLC change adjusted for age, race and smoking status is shown in Supplementary Figure S1. Plasma HDLC change was adjusted for race.
For in vitro cholesterol measurements, lipids were extracted from the CAP LCLs with hexane and isopropyl alcohol (3:2, v/v), and dried under nitrogen. Intracellular total cholesterol and free cholesterol levels were quantified using the Amplex Red Cholesterol Assay Kit (Life Technologies) following manufacturers instructions, and normalized to total cellular protein content. For measurement of cholesterol esters, extracted lipids were incubated with esterase up to 2hrs, and cholesterol ester was calculated as difference of the total minus free cholesterol. The change in cholesterol ester was calculated as the delta log of the cholesterol ester in the statin minus control treated cells.
All in vivo and in vitro phenotypes were tested for association with the ZNF542P expression changes using Spearman rank correlation in R.
Huh7 cells grown in MEM with 10% FBS were reverse transfected with a Silence Select siRNA (Life Technologies) targeting ZNF542P (n258919) or a non-targeting control (NTC, assay number AM6411, Life Technologies) using the siPORT transfection reagent as previously described. After 24 hrs, cell culture media was replaced with media supplemented with either 2M activated simvastatin or control buffer. Simvastatin was kindly provided by Merck. RNA was extracted using Qiashredders (Qiagen) and the PureLink RNA Mini Kit (Life Technologies), and cDNA was synthesized using the cDNA Archive Kit (Life Technologies). ZNF542P values were quantified by a TaqMan assay (n258919_asy, Life Technologies) and normalized to CLTPM as a loading control. HMGCR, HMGCS, MVK and LDLR transcript levels were quantified as previously described. All qPCR reactions were performed in triplicate. Intracellular total cholesterol, free cholesterol, and cholesterol ester were quantified as above. All cultures were verified to be mycoplasma free using the MycoSensor qPCR Assay Kit (Agilent).
One-way ANOVA was used to identify statistically significant effects of ZNF542P knock-down on levels of cellular cholesterol and transcripts. For ANOVA p<0.05, statistically significantly differences between treatment conditions were identified using Tukeys multiple comparisons test with adjusted p-values reported.