Details on the patients, the treatments given and evaluation of responses are provided in the Online Supplement. Both the therapeutic studies and the translational investigations were approved by the institutional review board (ethics committee) of the University of Freiburg Medical Center. Patients (all treated at the Freiburg study site) provided their written informed consent to be included in the respective clinical studies, and to related translational investigations according to the Declaration of Helsinki.
HbF levels were measured by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) before treatment and after the end of each treatment course (every 6 weeks) as described previously. Patients were grouped by normal (HbF 1%) or elevated HbF levels (HbF >1%), in accordance with reference values for the University of Freiburg Medical Center Central Laboratory.
We used non-parametric Spearman correlation coefficients (rs) to assess the association between HbF levels and other variables. To address the hypothesis that HbF after course 2 of decitabine treatment may predict hematologic responses after course 4, we employed linear regression models with HbF levels as the independent variable, and platelet count, hemoglobin concentration, neutrophil counts, and bone marrow blasts as dependent variables. Results are displayed graphically. The evaluation of possible outliers was based on studentized residuals. No potential outliers were excluded from the statistical analyses. The HbF value distributions between responders and non-responders were compared using the Wilcoxon two-sample test. Before-after differences in binary variables such as elevated HbF (yes/no) were assessed statically using the McNemar test.
Time-to-event endpoints comprised overall survival, progression-free survival, and AML-free survival. We performed landmark analyses starting at the time of HbF measurements after two cycles of decitabine treatment in order to avoid the so-called immortal-time bias. Thus, they were relevant only for patients who reached this time point. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate distributions of overall, progression-free and AML-free survival according to HbF value (> versus 1%), and to compute median estimations. A log-rank test was used to assess the prognostic importance of HbF value, and a Cox model to estimate the hazard ratio (HR) and its 95% confidence interval (95% CI).
Statistical analyses (all conducted at the CTU Freiburg, Germany) were performed with SAS 9.2 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA), and IBM SPSS Statistics 22.
K562 and HEL cells (DMSZ, Braunschweig, Germany) were cultured in RPMI1640 containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum. Cells were treated with three 24-h pulses of 100 and 20 nM decitabine (Sigma Aldrich) and harvested 144 h after the first treatment, as described previously. Hemin (Sigma Aldrich), a positive control for induction of erythroid differentiation, was added to the culture medium at a final concentration of 50 mM. Cell viability was tested by 0.4% trypan blue staining. Megakaryocytic differentiation was induced by exposure to 5 nM phorbol ester (PMA, Sigma Aldrich) for 48 h, as described previously..
Further information on the methods, including transcriptome profiling, immunoblotting, and methyl-CpG immunoprecipitation sequencing, is provided in the Online Supplement.