The phase 2, randomized, multicenter, open-label, dose-ranging single oral dose study of gepotidacin (1,500mg or 3,000mg in a 1:1 ratio stratified by sex) for the treatment of urogenital gonorrhea was described previously. Briefly, a single oral dose of gepotidacin was administered at baseline, followed by a test-of-cure (TOC) analysis 3 to 7days after dosing. Pretreatment and TOC urogenital swab specimens were obtained; rectal and pharyngeal specimens were also collected. The microbiologically evaluable population consisted of 69 randomly assigned participants (67 male and 2 female) with culture-confirmed urogenital gonorrhea at baseline who received gepotidacin and returned for TOC. Of the 69 microbiologically evaluable participants, 2 also had culture-confirmed pharyngeal gonorrhea and 3 also had culture-confirmed rectal gonorrhea. Microbiological success was defined as culture-confirmed eradication of N. gonorrhoeae at TOC. Microbiological failure was defined as culture-confirmed bacterial persistence of N. gonorrhoeae at TOC or the inability to determine the response (e.g., lost sample) of the baseline pathogen at TOC.
The guidelines of the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use, good clinical practice guidelines, and applicable country-specific requirements were followed, including institutional review board approval at each study site. All participants provided signed informed consent.
Specimens were processed for culture at local laboratories according to accepted microbiological procedures. All presumptively identified N. gonorrhoeae isolates from local laboratories were sent to the central laboratory for confirmatory identification testing (University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL). Agar dilution antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed according to Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) and Gonococcal Isolate Surveillance Program methods at the central laboratory. MICs were determined for gepotidacin, azithromycin, cefixime, ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, penicillin G, spectinomycin, and tetracycline, and where available, CLSI breakpoints were applied. For azithromycin, CLSI epidemiological cutoff values were applied.
QRDR genotyping of GyrA and ParC was performed for all N. gonorrhoeae isolates by GlaxoSmithKline (Collegeville, PA). N. gonorrhoeae was subcultured from a frozen stock onto chocolate II agar plates and incubated at 35°C for 18h with 5% carbon dioxide. A loopful (1-µl loop) of cells from a fresh plate was transferred to 50 µl Tris-EDTA buffer (pH 8) and boiled for 10min. The tube was then put on ice for 2min and centrifuged at 14,000rpm in an Eppendorf 5415C for 1min. The supernatant (2 µl) was used as the template for PCR. The PCR primers for the amplification of N. gonorrhoeae gyrA and parC encoding gyrase subunit A and topoisomerase IV subunit C, respectively, were described previously by Vernel-Pauillac et al.. PCR was carried out using a GeneAmp PCR system 9700 under the following conditions: 5min at 95°C; 35 cycles of 30 s at 95°C, 45 s at 48°C, and 1min at 72°C; 7min at 72°C for 1cycle, and then 4°C. Invitrogen PCR SuperMix High Fidelity (10790-020; Invitrogen) was used. The PCR products were separated, visualized, sized by electrophoresis on a 1% agarose gel containing ethidium bromide, and purified with a QIAquick PCR purification kit (28104; Qiagen) according to the manufacturers instructions. The PCR products were sequenced with a BigDye Terminator v3.1 cycle sequencing kit and analyzed with a 3730xl DNA analyzer; all equipment were from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA). Isolate sequences were compared to the parent and reference FA1090 sequences obtained from The National Center for Biotechnology Information (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Lasergene SeqMan software (DYNASTAR, Inc., Madison, WI) was used to identify nucleotide changes resulting in amino acid residue substitutions.
Whole-genome sequencing was conducted for the baseline and TOC isolates from all participants who were microbiological failures. The FASTA sequences for each isolate were entered into the following online sequence typing databases: MLST (www.mlst.net), NG-STAR (https://ngstar.canada.ca), and NG-MAST (www.ng-mast.net).
To assess FoR, 2 separate studies were performed by GlaxoSmithKline (Collegeville, PA) using Oxoid GC agar base containing BB BBL IsovitaleX enrichment in study 1 and Remel agar base plus hemoglobin and BB BBL IsovitaleX Enrichment in study 2. A select set of N. gonorrhoeae isolates recovered from participants, including microbiological successes and failures, from the phase 2 clinical trial having the GyrA (S91F and D95A/G) and ParC (D86N) mutations were tested. This study was performed to determine the FoR to gepotidacin in baseline urogenital isolates carrying the mutations associated with microbiological failure.
Gepotidacin was added to the appropriate medium-containing molten agar to yield 20ml of agar at the correct multiple of the MIC for each organism. Plates containing gepotidacin at 4 MIC or 10 MIC were poured and left to cool and to solidify. Plates containing no compound were also prepared to obtain viable counts and to serve as a growth control. Cultures were prepared by direct colony suspension in saline solutions to a turbidity equivalent to a 4 McFarland standard prepared from colonies grown on a chocolate plate after an overnight incubation at 35°C in 5% carbon dioxide. To determine the number of CFU present in the initial test inoculum, each suspension was serially diluted 1:10, and three 20-µL drops from each dilution were plated on agar and incubated overnight at 35°C in 5% carbon dioxide. Counting was performed at the dilution that provided distinguishable colonies, and an average from the 3 samples was used to calculate the number of CFU in the original suspension. In addition, 100 µl of each cell suspension was spread on the surfaces of plates containing the appropriate multiple of the MIC of the compound and on a control agar plate containing no compound. The plates were incubated at 35°C in 5% carbon dioxide. After 48 h of incubation, single colonies that grew on the FoR plates were streaked onto new plates containing identical drug concentrations and incubated at 35°C in 5% carbon dioxide. These purified resistant colonies were then isolated on plain chocolate agar plates and frozen in broth medium containing glycerol. To confirm their resistance phenotype, the susceptibility of these isolates to gepotidacin was tested by agar dilution methodology. PCR and sequencing of the QRDR were performed on all resistant isolates.
FoR was calculated by dividing the number of confirmed resistant colonies growing on antibiotic-containing plates by the total number of CFU in the initial test inoculum. Colonies were defined as resistant if their MICs were ¥4 the MIC of the parent strain.
The fAUC of gepotidacin achieved over 24h for each gepotidacin dose was estimated from data of healthy volunteers in a previously described population PK 2-compartment model with an absorption lag time and zero-order input for oral absorption. The model had a low coefficient of variation for all model parameter estimates of 2.2 and a residual variability of 39%. The variance was not inflated, as PK variability was expected to be similar between participants with gonorrhea and healthy volunteers. The mean gepotidacin 2-h postdose plasma concentrations in participants with gonorrhea were 2.89 and 6.35µg/ml for the 1,500-mg and 3,000-mg doses, respectively.