A total of 213 consecutive patients (183 with B-ALL, 30 with T-ALL) were identified and included in the study group. B-ALL patients were further subdivided into Ph+ (121/124 treatment-na¯ve) and Ph-negative (Ph) (51/59 treatment-na¯ve) subsets based on cytogenetic, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and/or molecular detection of t(9;22)(q34.1;q11.2)/BCR-ABL1. In the TALL group, 19 patients were treatment-na¯ve and 11 presented with relapsed/refractory disease after prior treatment. T-ALL patients were subdivided into immunophenotypic subsets based on the expression of CD1a and sCD3: the subsets were early (CD1a, sCD3), thymic (CD1a+, sCD3), or mature (CD1a, sCD3+) T-ALL. Patients with ETP-ALL were defined as described previously. Additional details regarding the study group are provided in the Online Supplement. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center (MDACC) and conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
For the flow cytometry analysis (details below), we used an allophycocyanin-conjugated anti-CD123 (IL-3 receptor  chain) antibody (clone 7G3; BD Pharmingen, BD Biosciences) according to the manufacturers recommendation. The humanized anti-CD123 antibody G4723A and a humanized non-targeting control antibody of the same IgG1 isotype and identical Fc sequences, were generated at ImmunoGen. IMGN632 and the control DGN549 antibody drug conjugate were produced via conjugation of DGN549 to the G4723A and the non-targeting IgG1 antibodies, respectively, as described previously.
The blast gate was defined on the basis of CD45dim expression and side-scatter characteristics and quantified as a percentage of total gated events. For analysis of CD123 expression, measurements included mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) on leukemic blasts (adjusted for background fluorescence using negative internal controls) and relative mean fluorescence intensity (RFI) ratio (leukemic blasts versus non-leukemic events). In patients samples, positive CD123 expression (CD123+) was defined as expression in ¥20% of leukemic blasts using MFI by comparison to background fluorescence and fluorescence on non-leukemic gated events, respectively. Additional details are provided in the Online Supplement.
Conventional cytogenetics, fluorescence in situ hybridization, polymerase chain reaction-based molecular diagnostics, and next-generation sequencing-based mutation profiling were performed on bone marrow aspirate specimens as described previously.
B-ALL cell lines CRF-SB and JM-1 (from American Type Culture Collection) and KOPN-8, SEM, 380, TOM-1, and SD-1 (from Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen) were procured between 2000 and 2015; they were characterized by the respective vendors using DNA profiling. Cytotoxicity was assessed using either a water-soluble tetrazolium salt 8 (WST-8)-based cell viability assay (Dojindo Molecular Technologies) as described previously or the alamarBlue Cell Viability Reagent (Invitrogen). Further details are given in the Online Supplement.
Bone marrow mononuclear cells from 11 newly diagnosed and 10 relapsed/refractory B-ALL patients were obtained from MDACC or ConversantBio. The number of CD123 antibody-binding sites per cell (ABC) was quantified by the BD QuantiBRITE„¢ Fluorescence Quantitation Kit (BD Biosciences) using G4723A conjugated to R-phycoerythrin at a 1:1 ratio, as already described. Cell proliferation for samples treated with IMGN632 was assessed using the CellTiter-Glo (Promega) or Cell Trace„¢ Violet stain (Invitrogen) techniques. Additional details are provided in the Online Supplement.
The statistical analysis methodology is described in the Online Supplement.