This work has been conducted in the context of the CORDIOPREV study (Clinical Trials Registry NCT0092493741). The study protocol was approved by the Human Investigation Review Committee of the Reina Sofia University Hospital (HURS, Cordoba, Spain), according to institutional and Good Clinical Practice guidelines. The CORDIOPREV study is a prospective, randomized, controlled trial that includes 1002 coronary heart disease (CHD) patients, who had their last coronary event over six months before joining the study. Details of the study, including inclusion and exclusion criteria and cardiovascular risk factors of the patients have been published elsewhere. Briefly, patients aged 2075¯years, with established CHD but without clinical events in the last six months with no other serious illnesses and a life expectancy of at least five years were eligible, with the intention of following a long-term monitoring study. In addition to conventional treatment for CHD, subjects were randomized in two different dietary models (Mediterranean and low-fat diets). The intervention phase is still in progress, and will have a follow up of seven years. Specifically, 462 of those patients were non-T2DM at the inclusion of the study (baseline) and, from those, 107 patients developed T2DM (Incident-T2DM cases) after a mean follow-up of 60¯months, according to all the American Diabetes Association (ADA) diagnosis criteria, evaluated on the basis of glucose tolerance tests performed each year (Supplementary Fig. 1). T2DM was diagnosed if one or more of following criteria were present in the study subjects: fasting plasma glucose (FPG) concentration¯¥¯126¯mg/dL, impaired fasting glucose (IFG); FPG ¥200¯mg/dL after 2¯h of oral glucose test (OGTT), impaired glucose tolerance (IGT); glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) ¥6.5%. Specifically, among the 107 incident-T2DM patients, 43 subjects were diagnosed during the first year of follow-up, 24 during the second year, 11 during the third year, 19 during the fourth year and 10 during the fifth year (Supplementary Fig. 1). The remaining 355 subjects did not develop T2DM during the study period. In the present study, all the incident-T2DM cases (n¯=¯107) were included together with 108 matched, randomly selected controls, who did not develop T2DM during the follow-up (non-T2DM subjects) (Supplementary Table 1). The random selection of the non-T2DM subjects was performed using computational stratified sampling from the 355 non-T2DM subjects of the CORDIOPREV study according to the following clinical, anthropometric and biochemical variables: diet, age, gender, fasting plasma glucose, body mass index, LDL-cholesterol and HDL-cholesterol. To implement this type of sampling, the target population was first divided into separate strata and then, samples were randomly selected within each stratum through simple automatic sampling by using the R software.
Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) and fat-rich meal tests were implemented in all patients to dynamically determine the metabolic status of the patient, as previously reported. Briefly, OGTT (75¯g dextrose monohydrate in 250¯ml water, NUTER. TEC GLUCOSA, Subra, Toulouse, France) was started at 8:00¯am, and plasma samples were collected at 0, 30, 60, 90 and 120¯min to determine plasma glucose and insulin levels. Fat-rich meal test (0.7¯g fat and 5¯mg cholesterol per kg body weight with 12% saturated fatty acids, 10% polyunsaturated fatty acids, 43% monounsaturated fatty acids, 10% protein, and 25% carbohydrates) was performed at 8:00¯am. Blood samples were collected before the meal and after 4¯h. Biochemical determination of metabolic parameters and calculation of insulin resistance and sensitivity indexes were performed as previously reported. Further details are provided in Supplementary Material and Methods.
Venous blood from the participants (12¯h overnight fast) was collected in tubes containing EDTA during the fat-rich meal test, at 0 and 4¯h. PBMCs were isolated as previously described.
Total RNA from PBMCs was isolated using Direct-zol RNA kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA) following manufacturer's instructions. The amount of RNA recovered was determined and its quality assessed by the NanoDrop2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher). Specifically, all the RNA samples passed the quality controls, being the 260/280 and 230/260 absorbance ratios among 1.82.0. One g of RNA was reverse transcribed (RT) to cDNA using random hexamer primers with the First Strand Synthesis Kit (Thermo Fisher).
PBMCs from n¯=¯7 healthy subjects (Supplementary Table 2) were extracted as described above, and then cultured in serum-free RPMI medium (Lonza). 500,000 cells/well from each subject were seeded on ultra-low attachment multi 12-well plates (Corning Costar, Sigma) and treated per duplicate with 10% baseline fasting and postprandial serum derived from control and incident-T2DM patients (specifically, we used serum form individuals that developed T2DM during the first two years of follow-up). After the incubation periods (4 and 24¯h), PBMCs were centrifuged and RNA was extracted and isolated using TRI-reagent (Sigma).
A 48.48 Dynamic Array based on microfluidic technology (Fluidigm, San Francisco, CA, USA) was implemented to determine the expression of 48 transcripts in 48 samples, simultaneously. Specific primers for human transcripts including components of the major (n¯=¯13) and minor spliceosome (n¯=¯4), associated SFs (n¯=¯28) and three housekeeping genes were specifically designed (Supplementary Table 3). The panel of splicing machinery components was selected on the basis of two main criteria: 1) the relevance of the given spliceosome components in the splicing process (such as the components of the spliceosome core) and 2) the demonstrated implication in the regulation of splicing variants implicated in the pathophysiology of T2DM (as is the case of the 28 splicing factors selected in this study).
Primers were selected using Primer3 software with selection parameters set to identify primer pairs that: 1) span an intron (when possible), 2) differ by no more that 1¯°C in annealing temperature, 3) are at least 20¯bp in length, 4) have a GC content between 45 and 55%, but 5) exclude primers that may form primer-dimers. Sequences of selected primers were used in BLAST (NCBI) searches to check for potential homology to sequences other than the designated target. Initial screening of primer efficiency using real-time detection was performed by amplifying 2-fold dilutions of RT products, where optimal efficiency was demonstrated by a difference of one cycle threshold between dilutions and a clear melting peak followed by a graded temperature-dependent dissociation to verify that only one product was amplified. The thermocycling profile consisted of: 1) 95¯°C for 1¯min; 2) 35¯cycles of denaturing (95¯°C for 5¯s) and annealing/extension (60¯°C for 20s); and 3) a last cycle where final PCR products were subjected to graded temperature-dependent dissociation (60¯°C to 95¯°C, increasing 1¯°C/3¯s). PCR products were then column-purified (FAVORGEN Biotech, Vienna, Austria) and sequenced to confirm target specificity. After confirmation of primer efficiency and specificity, the concentration of purified products was determined, and PCR products were serial diluted to obtain standards containing 1, 101,102, 103, 104, 105, and 106 copies of the synthetic template. Standards were then amplified by qPCR, and standard curves were generated using Stratagene Mx3000p software. The slope of a standard curve for each template examined was approximately 3.33 (R2¯¯1), indicating that the efficiency of amplification of our primers was 100%, meaning that all templates in each cycle were copied.
Preamplification, exonuclease treatment and qPCR dynamic array based on microfluidic technology were implemented following manufacturer's instructions using the Biomark System and the Real-Time PCR Analysis Software (Fluidigm). Additional details are provided in Supplementary Material and Methods. Finally, in the case of PBMC samples from non-T2DM and Incident-T2DM patients, the expression level of each transcript was adjusted by a normalization factor (NF) obtained from the expression levels of two different housekeeping genes [Beta-actin (ACTB) and Glyceraldehyde-3-Phosphate Dehydrogenase (GAPDH)] using Genorm 3.3, while ACTB was the housekeeping gene used to normalize the expression level of each transcript in the in vitro experiment. This selection was based on the stability of these housekeeping genes among the experimental groups to be compared, wherein the expression of these housekeeping genes was not significantly different among groups.
Data were evaluated for heterogeneity of variance using the KolmogorovSmirnov test and are expressed as mean¯¯SEM. Statistical analysis was carried out using unpaired t-test, Mann Whitney U test or one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett's test. Significant correlations were studied using bivariate Spearman correlation methods. The odds ratio (OR) was calculated by logistic regression analysis by comparing T1 vs. T3. The subjects were categorized into tertiles of expression levels as low (T1), intermediate (T2) and high (T3). Predictive models were constructed by logistic regression (first with the SPSS software and later validated with the R language), Random Forest and C4.5 (both with R language) algorithms and followed by cross-validation studies by using the full-dataset of variables or a selection of them (obtained by feature ranking processes) as described in Supplementary Material and Methods. AUCs from ROC curves were compared by DeLong test. P-values smaller than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. When appropriate, analyses were adjusted for age, diet, gender, BMI, glycated hemoglobin, HDL and triglycerides. Statistical analyses were carried out with GraphPad Prism 6 (La Jolla, CA, USA) and SPSS 17.0 (IBM).