We undertook an open-label, non-randomised, phase 1/2 clinical study at the Pediatric Clinical Research Unit and Pediatric Immunohematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit of the San Raffaele Scientific Institute (Milan, Italy). The drug product (autologous CD34+ cells genetically modified with a lentiviral vector encoding for human WAS cDNA), trial design, and procedures have been described previously (appendix pp 13). Patients were eligible for the study if they had Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome defined by a WAS genetic mutation, with absent WASP expression, severe WAS mutation, or severe clinical phenotype (Zhu clinical score ¥3). We included patients if they had no HLA-identical sibling donor or, for children younger than 5 years of age, no suitable 10/10 matched unrelated donor or 6/6 unrelated cord blood donor. We excluded patients who either had HIV infection, neoplasia, cytogenetic alterations typical of myelodisplastic syndrome or acute myeloid leukaemia, or end-organ functions or any other severe disease which, in the judgment of the investigator, would have been inappropriate for entry into this study. We also excluded patients who had undergone an allogeneic HSPC transplant in the previous 6 months or earlier and had evidence of residual cells of donor origin. The conditions required by the study protocol for enrolment of patients have been assessed and fulfilment of the inclusion and exclusion criteria have been assessed in the screening phase, during which time eligible patients underwent clinical, laboratory, and instrumental pretreatment work-up, including additional disease-specific assessments. We obtained a bone marrow aspirate to assess morphology, cellularity, CD34+ cell content, and clonogenic activity.
The protocol and other trial-related materials were approved by the independent ethics committee of the San Raffaele Scientific Institute and the Italian regulatory authority (Agenzia Italiana del Farmaco [AIFA]). Written informed consent was provided by parents or legal representatives of patients before initiation of study-specific procedures.
For the assessment of WASP expression and T lymphocyte proliferative responses, we obtained peripheral blood samples from healthy controls, in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Informed consent was approved by the institutional ethics committee of the San Raffaele Hospital in 2009 (Tiget Periblood protocol).
We obtained a backup of autologous HSPCs and cryopreserved them approximately 510 weeks before the planned day of gene therapy, either by bone marrow harvest or by leukapheresis, after administration of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (in most cases, lenograstim), with or without plerixafor. If the HSPC source was mobilised peripheral blood, we also gathered cells for future transduction at this time and cells were cryopreserved until the start of gene transduction on day 3. If the HSPC source was bone marrow, we obtained cells from iliac crests under general anaesthesia on day 3.
We administered intravenous CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab 375 mg/m2) on day 22. The reduced-intensity conditioning regimen comprised eight doses of intravenous busulfan administered every 6 h from days 3 to 1 (plus an optional ninth dose to reach the target cumulative busulfan area under the curve [AUC], if needed) and two doses of intravenous fludarabine (30 mg/m2 per day) on days 3 and 2. We monitored busulfan pharmacokinetics and adjusted the dose to avoid excessive toxicity or insufficient exposure. Initially, the target busulfan AUC range was 45006000 ngh/mL per dose, equivalent to a cumulative target of 3600048000 ngh/mL. We amended the cumulative busulfan AUC target to 48000 (10%) ngh/mL after treatment of six patients. The actual doses and AUC of busulfan received by each patient are summarised in the appendix (p 13). One intravenous infusion of autologous CD34+ cells obtained from bone marrow harvest or mobilised peripheral blood stem cells and transduced with the WAS lentiviral vector was given on day 1. The planned target dose was 510106 CD34+ cells per kg, with an acceptable range of 220106 cells per kg. CD34+ cell manipulation and transduction procedures were done at MolMed SpA (Milan, Italy), as described previously. Patients were in hospital for a median of 52 days (range 3682), during which time they underwent chemotherapy, gene therapy, and short-term follow-up, then they were followed up as outpatients unless invasive procedures were needed or complications arose. Clinical examinations were scheduled during screening, at baseline (timing of baseline varied by patient and was from the end of screening to the day before harvest of peripheral blood cells or the day before rituximab administration [which was on day 22]), day 14, day 1 (when gene therapy was initiated), day 7, day 14, day 21, day 30, day 60, day 90, day 180, and year 1, year 1·5, year 2, year 2·5, year 3, and annually to year 8. After treatment, patients' assessment also included routine laboratory tests, microbiological tests, diagnostic imaging, immune profiling, and specific immunological tests, according to the time schedule defined in the study protocol. All adverse eventsregardless of seriousness or relation to the drug producthave been recorded in trial case report forms, and the investigators have kept detailed records of all reported adverse events. We used Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events for grading of adverse events, or clinical judgment if this grading was not applicable.
We assessed quality of life with a questionnaire (appendix pp 1, 2) given to patients' parents, which was composed of questions about lifestyle and life in a protected environment (eg, hygiene restrictions, food, contact with other children), attendance at school (according to age), social ability with peers, and practice of sport activities (according to age). The questionnaire was given to parents before treatment and then every year at the follow-up visit (starting in year 1 after gene therapy).
The primary study objectives were to assess the safety of drug product administration after a reduced-intensity conditioning regimen, the long-term engraftment of WASP-expressing gene-transduced cells, and the efficacy of gene therapy in terms of improvement in immune function and thrombocytopenia. Secondary study objectives were to assess the efficacy of gene therapy in improving the patient's clinical condition with respect to severe infections, bleeding episodes, autoimmunity measures, and eczema.
Details of safety and efficacy endpoints are in the appendix (p 1). The primary safety endpoints were safety of the conditioning regimen and short-term and long-term safety of lentiviral gene transfer into HSPCs. The primary efficacy endpoints were overall survival, sustained engraftment of genetically corrected HSPCs, expression of vector-derived WASP, improved T-cell function, antigen-specific responses to vaccinations, and improved platelet count and mean platelet volume normalisation. The endpoints for this study are the same as those defined after initial follow-up of the first three patients treated, reported previously.
The sample size was calculated based on the low prevalence of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and the degree of novelty of the proposed experimental approach. Thus, we planned to treat eight patients over an estimated 5-year recruitment period. Planned analyses are presented for the intention-to-treat population, defined as all patients treated with lentiviral gene therapy in the study, and consider data available within the clinical database. Data are summarised using descriptive statistics. Adverse events, serious adverse events, infections, bleeding events, number of platelet transfusions, days in hospital, and anti-infective treatments are summarised as rates (number of events or treatments per patient-year of observation [PYO]). We calculated 95% CIs for crude rates based on the Poisson exact method. We used Medidata Rave 2017.2.3 software to collect data in this study (via electronic case report forms). For analysis of descriptive statistics we used SAS version 9.4, and for data analysis and graphical representation of data we used Microsoft Excel 365 and Graph Pad Prism version 5 for Mac OS X.
This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (number NCT01515462) and EudraCT (number 2009-017346-32).
The funder had no role in study design but did contribute to protocol amendments. The funder had a role in data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, and writing of the report. The corresponding author had full access to all data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.