The baseline characteristics and additional details about the research participants have been described elsewhere. In brief, subjects were recruited from the Lexington, KY area in the summer (June 1 and September 15; mean temperature 2024°C). Baseline biopsies of thigh adipose were performed, the subjects then applied an icepack to one leg for 30minutes each day for 10 consecutive days, and thigh biopsies were performed on the cold treated leg and the contralateral leg. All subjects gave informed consent, and the protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of Kentucky. All experiments were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. The Clinicaltrials.gov registration identifier is NCT02596776 (date of registration: 04/11/2015).
We used the Nanostring ncounter multiplex system to measure the expression of 130 genes and six housekeeping genes in purified RNA from SC WAT. The genes in the code set are described in Table S1 and reference. AR receptor expression was determined by real-time RT PCR as described. The primer sequences are in Table S2.
Mast cells were identified in SC WAT using mouse anti-tryptase (#sc-33676, Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc, Dallas, TX). Sections were deparaffinized, subjected to antigen retrieval, blocked with 5% normal goat serum followed with a Streptavidin/Biotin block (# SP-2002, Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA), and then incubated consecutively with anti-tryptase primary antibody overnight. Samples were rinsed and incubated with biotinylated goat anti-mouse antibody (# 1-065-003, Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA), strepavidin-HRP (#S911, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA), and then AlexaFluor 594 tyramide reagent (#B40957, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The slides were cover slipped using vectashield with DAPI (Vector Labs). Mast cells were counted in the non-fibrotic areas of the adipose tissue using images captured with a Zeiss AxioImager MI upright fluorescent microscope (Zeiss, Gottingen, Germany), and analysis was performed using Zen software (Zeiss). Degranulated mast cells were defined as having irregular shape with jagged edges and visible tryptase-filled vacuoles surrounding the cell. Capillary and vessel density was determined by staining with lectin-TRITC (#L4889, Sigma-Aldrich). Sections were prepared as above and incubated with lectin-TRITC for 2hours followed by 4%PFA post fixation, and then cover slipped with vectashield with DAPI. Capillaries were counted as structures between 5 and 10 microns and vessels were above 10 microns.
TIB64 cells (P815, ATCC, Manassas, VA) were grown at 37°C in DMEM (#11885-092; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Grand Island, NY) with10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; #101; Tissue Culture Biologicals, Tulare, CA). One mL of TIB64 cells at a concentration of 1106 cells/mL was transferred to a centrifuge tube, spun down to remove growth medium, and resuspended in 2% FBS-DMEM medium warmed to the indicated temperature; the medium contained 100nM norepinephrine as indicated. The cells were incubated at 37°C or 32°C for the indicated times and medium was harvested by centrifugation. Histamine was detected with a histamine EIA kit (Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI) following the manufacturers protocol.
Paired students t tests were conducted in Graphpad Prism version 7.0. The change in UCP1 protein determined by immunohistochemistry (post-pre) was determined from our previous study. Histamine release was analyzed by one-way analysis of variance to determine group differences at both 120 and 240minutes. Furthermore, pairwise comparisons were made based on Fishers least significant difference approach. Repeated measures multivariate analysis of variance (RM MANOVA) was performed as described to analyze mast cell recruitment and degranulation. Normality was assessed via the use of Q-Q plots. SAS version 9.4 was utilized for these analyses.