The study was approved by University of California, San Francisco institutional review board. Written informed consent was given by all participants. This study followed the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) reporting guideline. A trial protocol including details of participant recruitment, written informed consent, screening, selection, compensation, and involvement in the study is available in Supplement 1. The RNA sequencing analysis was approved by the University of California at Riverside institutional review board.
The protocol for the primary study during which the nasal epithelial cell samples were collected appears in the CONSORT flow diagram (Figure 1) and Supplement 1. It was conducted at the University of California, San Francisco, between 2011 and 2015. Briefly, 26 healthy nonsmokers who were not exposed to secondhand cigarette smoke in daily life were exposed, head-only, to THS aerosol and to conditioned, filtered air for 3 hours using an exposure chamber described previously. Of these 26 individuals, 13 (8 women and 5 men) had nasal epithelial cell samples collected before and after each exposure. Nasal epithelial samples were collected from the anterior, inferior turbinate using small, sterile plastic curettes (RhinoPro; Arlington Scientific, Inc). These samples were immediately placed in RNAlater (Qiagen) and shipped frozen to the University of California, Riverside, where RNA extraction and subsequent analyses were performed.
Ribonucleic acid was isolated from human nasal samples using RNeasy Micro Kits (Qiagen) and stored at 80 °C. We quantified RNA using a NanoDrop ND-1000 Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples from 4 participants had RNA concentrations greater than 3 ng/L, and these were used for subsequent analysis. Frozen RNA samples were shipped to Cofactor Genomics for library preparation and sequencing.
Cofactor Genomics performed quality control on RNA samples, and RNA integrity was determined using a the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. Samples with RNA integrity numbers between 8 and 10 were used for library construction. Total RNA was reverse-transcribed using an Oligo (dT) primer (Co-Factor), and limited cDNA amplification was performed using the SMARTer Ultra Low Input RNA Kit for Sequencingv4 (Takara Bio USA, Inc). Full-length cDNA was fragmented and tagged, followed by limited polymerase chain reaction enrichment to generate the final cDNA sequencing library (Nextera XT DNA Library Prep; Illumina). Libraries were sequenced as single-end 75base pair reads using an Illumina NextSeq500 following the manufacturer's instructions. Because the amount of nasal epithelium in each sample was very limited, we were not able to perform confirmatory quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
FASTQ files obtained from Cofactor were processed on a high-performance computing cluster at the University of California, Riverside. The RNA sequencing analysis workflow implemented by systemPipeR was used to perform all the downstream data processing. Briefly, adapter sequences and low-quality tails were removed from the raw reads using the Trimmomatic package. The preprocessed reads were then aligned against the hg19 human reference genome in the University of California, Santa Cruz, Genome Browser with Tophat2 (version 2.0.14). Read counting was performed with the summarizeOverlaps function of the GenomicsAlignment package. Only unique reads overlapping the exonic gene regions were counted. Using a cutoff value of at least 1 read per kilobase per million of mapped reads averaged across all samples, raw expression counts of the remaining 10938 genes passing this filter were used for differential expression analysis with EdgeR. Within each experimental group (group 1, 2, 3, and 4), the read counts from the 4 biological replicates were combined. For differential expression analysis, groups 1 and 2 (before and after clean air) and groups 3 and 4 (before and after THS) were treated as 2 separate experimental comparisons. Genes were considered to be DEGs if they had a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 0.1 by EdgeR. ClusterProfiler and ReactomePA packages were used to identify overrepresented GO terms and enriched Reactome pathways, respectively, as described in the package manual. Additionally, enrichment analyses of pathways were performed using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software (Qiagen). Briefly, statistically significant transcripts were uploaded to IPA, and human homologs were automatically identified using the National Center for Biotechnology Informations HomoloGene.
The EdgeR package was used to obtain log-fold changes, P values, and FDR scores (based on the Benjamini-Hochberg method). A gene was considered significantly differentially expressed if the FDR was less than 0.1. ClusterProfiler version 3.12.0 and ReactomePA version 1.28.0 packages used a Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted P value of less than .05 to identify significantly enriched Gene Ontology (GO) terms and Reactome pathways, respectively. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis used the Fisher 1-tailed exact test with a P value threshold of .05 to identify statistically significant pathways; the algorithm considered both direct and indirect relationships using the Ingenuity Knowledge Base (genes only) as the reference set. Analysis was performed using the EdgeR package in R statistical analysis software version 3.263 (R Project for Statistical Computing).