This study is a part of the BARU studya randomized, controlled parallel-group design performed in eight weeks. Subjects were randomly assigned (1:1) to compose either one of the following groups: PLA (placebo) or BARU (baru group). Group allocation was not discussed with the participants; however, it was likely clear to them which group they were assigned to, based on the intervention provided.
Sixty overweight or obese women were recruited to take part in this study; however, 46 women concluded all assessments and finished the intervention. The inclusion criteria were nonsmokers and nonalcoholics who had BMIs (in kg/m2) ranging from 24.9 to 40 and were not taking any dietary supplements.
Potential subjects were not included in the study if they (1) were on weight loss diet/medication; (2) were diagnosed with any acute or chronic disease; (3) were taking medication that could affect the immune system; (4) were pregnant or planned to become pregnant; (5) had gastrointestinal surgery, hormone replacement therapy, or antibiotic treatment.
The study was approved by the Local Ethical Committee (protocol 044/2012), registered at the Brazilian Clinical Trials Registry (RBR2wpryx), and all of the subjects signed the informed consent. All of the procedures were in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration revised in 2008.
Both groups received a normocaloric and isoenergetic diet prescription (2530 kcal/kg). The macronutrient composition of diets was 50%60% of carbohydrate, 20%30% of fatty acids, and 15%20% of protein. Registered dietitians provided individualized dietary advice according to the guidelines for healthy eating. The diet plan consisted of six meals with the amount of each food, cooking techniques and a food substitution list. The energy content of the diet was individually calculated to match each participants estimated energy needs and adjusted for levels of physical activity. Physical activity was assessed by the validated International Physical Activity Questionnaire.
The PLA group received 800 mg/day of maltodextrin dispensed in sachet, and the BARU group received 20 g (approximately 15 units of almonds) of roasted baru almonds. To reduce bias, we emphasized that baru almonds were being offered in two different forms: Traditional and powder. The supplements were delivered in closed packages. The nutritional composition of baru almond was previously described, and the placebo was chosen for not influencing the oxidative state and representing an increase of only 3.2 kcal/day in daily energy intake. The amount of baru almonds was established according to the portions of seeds and nuts, which represents the average intake for this almond. The baru almonds were roasted in a conventional electric oven to inactivate any anti-nutritional factors present, vacuum packed, and stored without exposure to light.
Daily supplement compliance and dietary intake were monitored as follow: (1) weekly via telephone calls and monthly during routine consultations; (2) counting the remained empty packages when the participants returned to their consultation; (3) self-reported dietary intake by 24-h dietary recall conducted at the face-to-face interview by trained dietitians; (4) 3-day food record, including a weekend day; and (5) the increment in plasma oleic fatty acid after intervention. Dietary composition was analyzed using the AVANUTRI software.
Blood samples were drawn from the antecubital vein in the arm after a 12-h fast. Samples were centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C (Combate, C.E.L.M, S£o Paulo, Brazil) and stored at 80 °C until analysis. Alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, creatinine, -glutamyl transferase, urea, and uric acid were determined by automated enzymatic methods (VITROS 950 Xrl Chemistry System, Johnson & Johnson, NJ, USA).
Plasma cytokines (IL-6, IL-10, TNF-, and adiponectin) were measured in duplicate using Luminex technology with Milliplex MAP (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) multiplex magnetic bead-based antibody detection kits according to the manufacturers instructions. The intra-assay CV ranged from 1.6 to 4.0% and the inter-assay CV 10.0 to 18.3% for all cytokines measured. The antioxidant enzymes activitiescatalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPX), and superoxide dismutase (SOD) were assessed in erythrocyte lysates using a microplate reader (BioTek Synergy HT, Winooski, VT, USA). Serum malondialdehyde (MDA) was measured by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using a method previously described with minor modifications.
Serum concentration of trace elements was determined by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), equipped with a reaction cell (DRC-ICP model ELAN DRC II, PERKIN ELMER Sciex, Norwalk, CT, USA). Samples were diluted (1:50) in a solution containing 0.01% (v/v) Triton X-100 and 0.05% (v/v) nitric acid. Rhodium (10 mg/L) was used as an internal standard. Calibration standards ranged from 0 to 50 g/L.
The sample size was estimated using the G* Power software (version 3.0.10). Based on an increase in plasma GPx activity (effect size, d = 0.90) after the consumption of Brazil nut, a sample size of 21 participants would be needed in each group to give 80% power to detect a significant difference between BARU and placebo (with a two-sided type 1 error of 5%).
Data were expressed as mean  standard deviation (SD). The ShapiroWilk test was performed to assess normality and Levene test was performed to assess homoscedasticity. Paired t-test was used to identify within-group differences. Differences between groups were assessed by repeated measures analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with baseline values as a covariate and time as the repeated measure. The posthoc tests were performed with Sidak corrections. In case of non-normal distribution and/or non-homoscedastic data, log transformation was performed before further analysis. Macronutrients intake were adjusted for energy intake. The p-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical analyses were undertaken using SPSS v. 21.0 (IBM, North Castle, CT, USA) and STATA v. 12 (StataCorp, College Station, TX, USA).