Eligible study participants were 18 years or older, candidates for surgical resection following diagnosis of recurrent GBM or AG, and had available archived formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) or frozen tumor tissue from the initial surgery for molecular analysis. Additional eligibility criteria included participants having a Karnofsky performance scale score ¥ 70, adequate hematopoietic, renal and hepatic function, and the ability to provide written informed consent. Exclusion criteria included impaired gastro-intestinal drug absorption, a history of any cardiovascular disease, including long QT syndrome, and inability to comply with protocol procedures. Pregnant and lactating women and patients taking any strong inducers or inhibitors of CYP3A4/5 were also excluded. The clinical trial was approved by the University of Virginia Institutional Review Board () and by the FDA (IND #125168).
This single-institution (University of Virginia Health System) study was an open-label phase Ib clinical trial (Fig. 1). Baseline blood samples for ribociclib concentrations were collected prior to initiation of ribociclib treatment. Study participants were treated with ribociclib at the recommended phase II dose of 600 mg/day, taken once orally for 821 days prior to surgery. Novartis Pharmaceuticals generously provided 200 mg ribociclib capsules. Subjects received the last pre-surgical ribociclib dose 48 h prior to surgery to allow sufficient time for any modulation of downstream effectors of CDK4/6. We obtained blood samples within 1 h prior to surgery, and separated into plasma and buffy coat fractions. When feasible during surgery, CSF was also collected. Brain tumor core and infiltrating tumor were identified by co-localization with stealth MRI, and tissue samples of each area were obtained for FFPE or frozen (Fig. 2).
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for Rb was performed on recurrent GBM specimens (detailed below); participants with Rb-negative tumors were excluded from further treatment as previous work suggested that Rb-deficient tumors are unlikely to respond to CDK4/6 inhibition. Study participants with Rb-positive tumors continued ribociclib treatment on a 21-days-on, 7-days-off schedule of a 28-day cycle until disease progression or the development of unacceptable toxicity.
All patients had a post-operative brain MRI within 72 h post-surgery to determine the extent of resection and to have as a baseline for further measurement of tumor size. Subjects with Rb-positive tumors who continued ribociclib treatment post-surgery had follow-up MRI performed (including per-fusion and diffusion-weighted images) after every two cycles of treatment. The Response Assessment in Neuro-Oncology (RANO) Working Group criteria were used to determine disease progression.
Complete blood counts and blood chemistry, 12-lead electrocardiogram, vital signs, Karnofsky performance status, and physical exam were monitored throughout the course of treatment. Toxicities were graded using the National Cancer Institute (NCI) Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0, and adverse events were evaluated according to expectedness and attribution to drug treatment.
The total concentrations of ribociclib in plasma, CSF, and frozen tumor tissue samples were determined using a validated liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS/MS) method as previously described. The unbound fraction of ribociclib in plasma and tumor homogenate was determined using equilibrium dialysis with a 5-kDa cutoff regenerated cellulose membrane (96-well Equilibrium DIALYZER, Harvard Apparatus), as previously described. Unbound ribociclib concentration in plasma or tumor tissue samples was calculated as the product of the fraction unbound and the total drug concentration. The concentration of unbound ribociclib in plasma and tumor tissue samples was calculated as the product of the unbound fraction and the total concentration.
Methods provided in Supplementary Information.