Nine human gastric cancer cell lines (AGS, BGC823, HGC27, KATOIII, MKN1, MKN28, NCI-N87, SNU-1 and TMK-1) and one normal GES-1 gastric cell line were used in this study. Cell lines were maintained in RPMI-1640 medium (Gibco, Rockville, MD) with 10% fetal bovine serum (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA), penicillin (50 unit/ml) and streptomycin (50 µg/ml) at 370C with 5% CO2.
Primary tumor and their adjacent non-tumor tissues were obtained from gastric cancer patients during operation prior to any therapeutic intervention from the Prince of Wales hospital, Hong Kong. All samples were subsequently verified by histological evaluation. Informed consent was given to all the patients. The study protocol was approved by the Clinical Research Ethics Committee of Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Total RNA was extracted from cells and tissues using the Direct-zolTM RNA MiniPrep kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA). cDNA was synthesized from RNA using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Life Technologies). Real-time PCR was performed in a Roche LightCycler 480 system. Primer sequences are listed in Supplementary Table 1.
Genomic DNA was extracted using the QIAamp DNA Mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). DNA (500ng) was bisulfite modified with the EZ DNA MethylationTM Kit (Zymo Research). The bisulfite-modified DNA was amplified using primers for bisulfite genomic sequencing (BGS). The primers were designed using MethPrimer (http://www.urogene.org/methprim er/index1.html) Supplementary Table 1. PCR products for BGS were confirmed by agarose gel electrophoresis and then directly sequenced. Sequence data were analyzed by Chromas software.
Cell viability was determined using the MTT assay (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO). 5x103 cells/well were seeded in a 96-well plate and incubated overnight. At the end of drug treatment, MTT (0.5mg/ml) was added and incubated at 370C for 4h. The reaction was stopped by 10% SDS in 0.01N HCl and absorbance at 570nm was measured.
Cells (1x103 cells/well) were seeded in a 6-well plate and incubated overnight. Then the drugs at the indicated concentrations were added and incubated for 1 week. Colonies were fixed with 70% ethanol, stained with crystal violet solution, and counted.
Apoptosis was determined by staining cells with Annexin V and 7-amino-actinomycin (7-AAD) (BD Biosciences) with flow cytometry analysis. Cell cycle analysis was performed on fixed cells stained with propidium iodide.
HGC27 and MKN1 cells (1x106 cells) were treated with vehicle or PGE2 (2x10-6 M) for 48h. DNA was extracted using the QIAamp DNA Mini kit. We then submitted the samples to Shanghai Biotechnology Corporation (Shanghai, China) for Illumina 450K methylation array analysis. Background subtraction and normalization were performed. DiMmer package was used to identify commonly methylated genes in gastric cell lines. Genes epigenetically altered were included in Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis using Gene Set Analysis Toolkit V2 (http://bioinfo.vanderbilt.edu/webgestalt/), using all genes from humans as reference. Hypergeometric test statistical method and the BH multiple test adjustment method were used. Pathways with at >4 genes and adjusted p-values <0.05 were considered significantly enriched.
Control siRNA and siRNA targeting the Prostaglandin E Receptors (EP) 1, 2 and 4 were purchased from RiboBio, Inc. (Guangzhou, China). SiRNAs were transfected into gastric cancer cells using Lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer's protocol.
COX-2 transgenic mice were generated as described. Wild-type (WT) littermates were analyzed in parallel as controls. All C57BL/6 mice were maintained in metal cages on a 12 h light/dark cycle. The study protocol was approved by the Animal Experimentation Ethics Committee of the Chinese University of Hong Kong and all the experiments were performed in accordance with local guidelines. GC was induced in COX-2 transgenic and WT mice using N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU) as described. All the animals were killed at the end of week 50 by cervical dislocation. The stomach was opened along the greater curvature, examined macroscopically and fixed in 10% buffered formalin or snap frozen for subsequent histological and molecular analysis.
This animal study was approved by the Animal Experimentation Ethics Committee of the Chinese University of Hong Kong. HGC27 cells (1x107) were injected into the right flank of female nude mice (7-8 weeks old). When tumor volume reached 500mm3, the tumor was cut into 1mm3 pieces and implanted into both flanks of 6-7 weeks female nude mice (n=20). When average tumor size reached 150mm3, the mice (n=5 per group) were randomized into four groups and given 1) vehicle, 2) Celecoxib (10mg/kg/d, oral gavage), 3) decitabine (1mg/kg, i.p., 3 per week), and 4) Celecoxib (10mg/kg/d, oral gavage) plus decitabine (1mg/kg, i.p., 3 per week). Tumor volumes were measured twice per week with a digital caliper and tumor volumes were calculated by as follow: tumor volume=[lengthwidth (length+width/2)0.5]. After 3 weeks of treatment, the animals were sacrificed, and the tumors were collected and stored at -800C.
A randomized, placebo-controlled trial was conducted (from 2001 to 2004) consisting of patients initially diagnosed with gastric intestinal metaplasia. Patients were randomized and treated with placebo or rofecoxib 25 mg daily for 2 years. Age- and gender-matched samples from the placebo and rofecoxib groups (N=42) were randomly selected. Paraffin blocks were retrieved, section and stained with 5mC antibody (clone clone 33D3). Slides were scored by a senior pathologist blinded to the nature of the samples tested.
Total and/or nuclear protein was separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes. Blots were probed with primary antibodies at 40C overnight, and then with secondary antibody at room temperature for 1h. Proteins of interest were visualized using ECL Plus Western blotting detection reagents (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ).
DNMT3B activity in cells was evaluated using the EpiSeeker DNMT3B assay kit (Abcam, Cambridge, MA). The assay was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions and 10 micrograms of nuclear protein was used in each test.
Genomic DNA was isolated using commercially available kit, and diluted DNA were spotted on nitrocellulose membrane. After drying, nitrocellulose membrane was crosslinked under UV light and probed with anti-5mC antibody. Anti-ss/dsDNA served as loading control.
Data are presented as meansS.D. Difference between two groups (normally distributed) was determined by the Student's t-test. Non-parametric data between two groups were computed by Chi-square test or Fisher Exact test. P<0.05 were considered statistically significant.