Participants were recruited from Portland, Oregon (OR) area addiction treatment centers and the community through word of mouth and via study advertisements posted in clinics, websites, and newspapers. Individuals were enrolled into one of five groups: 1) control (CTL) group (n = 31): adults with no lifetime history of dependence on any substance other than nicotine or caffeine; 2) MA-active (MA-ACT) group (n = 13): adults actively using MA and currently meeting criteria for MA dependence; 3) MA-remission (MA-REM) group (n = 19): adults in early remission from MA dependence ¥ 1 month and  6 months; 4) active polysubstance dependence (POLY-ACT) group (n = 11): adults actively using and dependent on MA and at least one other substance (other than caffeine or nicotine); and 5) polysubstance remission (POLY-REM) group (n = 32): adults in early remission (abstinence ¥ 1 month and  6 months) from dependence on MA and at least one other substance (other than caffeine or nicotine). (Note: Although the currently accepted terminologies are MA use disorder and polysubstance use disorder, as per the DSM-5, the diagnostic categories were previously termed MA dependence and polysubstance dependence, and these terms are used when referring to the research participants described in this paper). This study was reviewed and approved by the Veterans Affairs Portland Health Care System and Oregon Health & Science University Institutional Review Boards. The procedures followed were in accordance with the ethical standards of these institutional review boards and with the Helsinki Declaration, as revised in 2004. Written informed consent was received from participants prior to inclusion in the study.
General exclusion criteria included: 1) history of major medical illness (by subject self-report during the structured interview) or current use of medications that are likely to be associated with serious neurological or immune dysfunction [e.g., stroke, traumatic brain injury, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, primary psychotic disorder or active psychosis, immunosuppressants, antivirals, benzodiazepines, opiates, stimulants, antipsychotics, anticholinergics, antiparkinson agents], 2) visible intoxication or impaired capacity to understand study risks and benefits or otherwise provide informed consent, and 3) based on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-Fourth Edition (DSM-IV) with confirmation by the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview questionnaire (MINI), meets criteria for past or current manic episode, schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, or other psychotic disorder. (Note that a history of temporary substance-induced psychosis was acceptable for participants in the substance use groups, as long as they did not currently meet criteria for a psychotic disorder, and they did not meet criteria for a psychotic disorder prior to active substance abuse).
Additional exclusion criteria for the control group included: 1) meets criteria for lifetime history of dependence on any substance (other than nicotine or caffeine dependence) based on the DSM-IV with confirmation by the MINI, 2) heavy alcohol use as defined by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (women: average alcohol use ¥ 7 standard drinks weekly for ¥ 1 year; men: average alcohol use ¥ 14 standard drinks weekly for ¥ 1 year), 3) use of marijuana > 2 times per month, 4) regular use of other addictive substances, 5) on the day of the study visits, tests positive on a urine drug analysis for any addictive drugs, including alcohol and marijuana, and 6) education beyond an associates degree.
Inclusion criteria for the MA dependent groups included: 1) DSM-IV criteria (with confirmation by the MINI) for MA dependence, 2) MA use > 2 days per week for > 1 year, and 3) no dependence [DSM-IV criteria with confirmation by the MINI) on other substances. Inclusion criteria for the polysubstance-dependent groups included: 1) DSM-IV criteria (with confirmation by the MINI) for dependence on MA and at least one other substance (other than caffeine or nicotine), and 2) MA use > 2 days per week for > 1 year. Inclusion criteria for the active groups included: 1) meets DSM-IV criteria for dependence on MA with confirmation by the MINI, 2) average MA use of ¥ 2 days per week for ¥ 1 year, and 3) last use of MA was  2 weeks ago. Inclusion criteria for the remission groups included: 1) all criteria for the active groups, except last use of MA and other substances (other than caffeine and nicotine) was ¥ 1 and  6 months ago, and 2) on the day of the study visit, does not test positive for any addictive drugs, including alcohol and marijuana.
Participants completed a structured clinical interview (MINI), urine drug screen [Uscreen 6 Panel Drug Test Cups (RapidDetectINC, Poteau, OK, USA)], HCV and HIV antibody screen, neuropsychological tests and provided a blood sample. Neuropsychological measures included the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) to assess depressive symptoms, Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item scale (GAD-7), Prospective and Retrospective Memory Questionnaire (PRMQ), a 16-item measure which records the frequency with which subjects report problems with aspects of everyday memory functioning), visual analog scales (VAS), 10 cm lines on which subjects mark alcohol and other drug cravings on a 0 to 100 scale (e.g.,), Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS), 9-item scale to rate self-reported tiredness, Brief Pain Inventory (BPI), and Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI), a 10-item scale to investigate several aspects of sleep quality. Interviews were conducted in clinical space at the VA Portland Health Care System (VAPORHCS) by three trained research associates under the direction of neuropsychologist Marilyn Huckans, PhD. Diagnoses and interpretation of responses to structured interviews were discussed at weekly meetings with Dr. Huckans, but no formal inter-rater reliability measures were calculated. Blood was drawn from non-fasting participants at rest by one-time venipuncture in clinic at the VAPORHCS. Samples were collected in cell preparation tubes (BD Vacutainer Systems, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) containing 1 ml of 0.1M sodium citrate solution. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated per standard operating procedures. PBMCs were washed twice in RPMI/5% FBS and then counted before freezing and storage in liquid nitrogen.
DNA was extracted using Puregene kits (Qiagen Inc., Germantown, MD, USA). PCR was performed on an Applied Biosystems (ABI) 9600 thermocycler using TAAR1 specific primers (Forward 5 CCTGATTATGGATTTGGGAAAA 3 Reverse 5 TCATAAAGGTCAGTACCCCAGA 3) using Amplitaq gold 360 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). DNA sequencing was performed using ABI BigDye v3.1 cycle sequencing reagents and analyzed on an ABI 3130XL Genetic Analyzer. DNA extraction quality analysis of 12 samples found that the 260/280 ratios were between 1.7 and 2.0 and all 260/230 ratios were greater than 1.5; the yields ranged from 727 g at a concentration between 37 and 127 ng/l. The variation in yield was due to differences in the initial cell numbers. Average yield was 19 g and 92 ng/l.
The TAAR1 variants were detected by direct Sanger sequencing and analyzed by using Sequencher 5.0 software (Gene Codes Corporation, Ann Arbor, MI, USA). Briefly, the sequencing data were trimmed to remove the low quality area. The variants were identified by comparative sequence alignments among the samples to the human TAAR1 reference sequence (NCBI reference sequence NC_000006.12: c132646026-132644898/NM_138327.2). The potential heterozygotes were analyzed by the ratio of primary and secondary peaks and manually validated. The candidate variants from the sample sequence were determined by comparison with the established NCBI dbSNP database and Ensembl SNP database.
Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO-K1) cells in culture were transfected with 2.5 g/10 cm dish of either WT or CV venus-tagged cDNA. Protein expression and fluorescence were measured by a modification of our previously described methods. EC50 values for the effects of -phenethylamine (-PEA) on cAMP production were also determined according to Shi et al. (2016). Secondary WT and CV mRNA structure was determined using RNAstructure tool software (http://rna.urmc.rochester.edu/RNAstructureWeb/).
For in vitro experiments, differences in light intensity between WT and CV TAAR1-transfected cells were analyzed by Students t-test. Dose-response curves for cAMP accumulation were analyzed by nonlinear regression using GraphPad Prism (San Diego, CA, USA). Between-group differences were assessed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) or two-way ANOVAs of genotype by -PEA concentration, followed with Tukeys multiple comparison test using GraphPad Prism software (San Diego, CA, USA). P-values < 0.05 were considered significant. To evaluate the relationship between TAAR1 genotype and neuropsychiatric function, principal component analysis (PCA) was applied to the correlation matrix of pre-specified neuropsychiatric characteristics of interest. Components were retained until at least 80% of the overall variance was accumulated. Those retained were rotated (orthogonal Varimax) to clarify the structure and limit neuropsychiatric characteristics from loading on multiple components simultaneously. PC scores were computed and correlated against individual neuropsychiatric characteristics to facilitate interpretation and identify dominant characteristics within each PC. Scores were then used as the response of interest in separate generalized linear models (GLM) with study group, TAAR1 genotype, and the interaction between these factors as predictors of primary interest, while adjusting for key demographic variables found also to be associated with the response. Exploratory plots revealed skewness in PC scores and increasing standard deviation proportional to the mean, so the GLM utilized a gamma distribution (with log link) after adding a small amount to all values sufficient to ensure all values were positive (shifted +1.4). Robust standard errors were used for estimation and testing to guard against potential mis-specification of the underlying distribution.