Two in vivo studies in human subjects were conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki II, approved by the regional Ethics Committee System, and reported at http://www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT02782221 and NCT01209429). Written and oral consent was obtained from all participants, who were healthy according to a medical interview and a physical examination, including routine blood chemistry tests. Two days prior to the study day, the participants were instructed to refrain from vigorous exercise and alcohol intake. Both studies were carried out in the Medical Research Laboratory, Aarhus University.
Nine obese men with a mean  SEM BMI of 31.8  2.2 kg/m2 in the age range of 2148 years were studied in a single-blinded, randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover study. Inclusion criteria: age >18 years old, male, healthy, BMI between 30 kg/m2 and 40 kg/m2.
Eight lean males with a mean  SEM BMI 22.5  1.5 kg/m2 in the age range of 1923 years were studied in a single-blinded, randomized 2  2 factorial design. Inclusion criteria: age >18 years old, male, healthy, BMI between 19 kg/m2 and 25 kg/m2.
All participants were examined on two occasions separated by a minimum of three weeks: (1) after an IV bolus of GH (Genotropin Miniquick, 0.6 mg) [GH], and (2) after an IV bolus of saline preceded by a subcutaneous (SC) injection of a GH receptor antagonist, pegvisomant (Somavert, 30 mg), 38 h prior to the study day in order to block the peripheral effects of endogenous GH. A SC injection of saline was injected 38 h prior to the GH day. The participants were studied in a quiet, thermo-neutral indoor environment in the supine position for 5.5 h (t = -30-300 min) after an overnight fast. At the onset of each study day, an IV cannula was inserted into a dorsal hand vein for blood sampling every 30 min. The hand was placed in a heat pad in order to obtain arterialized blood samples. The GH/saline bolus was given at t = 0 preceded by the first AT biopsy, blood sampling and indirect calorimetry. Four SC AT biopsies were performed at t = 0, t = 60, t = 180, and t = 300, respectively. Indirect calorimetry was performed for 30 min with a canopy system (Oxycon Pro; Intramedic, Gentofte, Denmark) at baseline (t = -30  0 min), t = 150180 min and t = 270300 min to estimate energy expenditure (EE), respiratory exchange rates (RER) and substrate oxidation rates as previously described. Urine was collected throughout the day to estimate urea excretion rates and protein oxidation.
The primary outcome was serum FFA concentrations as a measure of lipolysis. Secondary outcomes were biomarkers of intracellular lipolytic activity and GH signaling. Sample size was determined based on a power calculation.
All participants were examined on four occasions separated by a minimum of one week: (1) during a saline infusion following an overnight fast (Control), (2) during a GH infusion (30 ng/kg/min, Genotropin, Pfizer) following an overnight fast [GH], (3) during a saline infusion following a 36-hour fast (Fasting), and (4) during a GH infusion following a 36-hour fast (GH + Fasting). An IV cannula was placed in the antecubital vein for infusion. For blood sampling, a second cannula was placed in a heated dorsal hand vein. The participants were studied in a quiet, thermo-neutral indoor environment in the supine position for 4.5 h (t = 0270 min) including a 150-minutes basal period followed by a two-hour hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp (HEC) with an insulin infusion rate of 0.6 mU/kg/min (Actrapid; Novo Nordisk A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark). SC AT biopsies were taken at t = 120 (basal state) and at t = 270 (HEC). Data from this study have been published previously.
The participants and the lab technicians, but not the investigator, were blinded regarding the interventions. Following simple randomization procedures (computerized random numbers), the participants were assigned to start with either GH or pegvisomant. The randomization and the enrollment of participants were done by the investigator. All participants received the intended intervention and completed the study.
Plasma glucose and lactate levels were measured at bedside (YSI 2300 STAT Plus glucose analyzer; YSI, Burlington, VT). Insulin and glucagon (Merkodia, Uppsala, Sweden) and cortisol (DRG Diagnostics, Marburg, Germany) were analyzed using commercial ELISA kits. Serum FFA was determined by a colorimetric method employing a commercial kit (Wako Chemicals, Neuss, Germany). Serum GH concentrations were determined using chemiluminescence technology (IDS-iSYS human GH; Immunodiagnostic Systems, Boldon, UK). Plasma epinephrine and norepinephrine concentrations were measured by electrochemical detection following HPLC.
The SC AT biopsies were obtained from the periumbilical region by liposuction under sterile conditions using lidocaine as local anesthetic. The samples were immediately washed free of blood, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at 80 °C until use.
qPCR analyses were performed as previously described. TRIzol (Gibco BRL/Life Technologies, Roskilde, Denmark) were used to extract RNA. The PCR reactions were performed in duplicate using a LightCycler SYBR Green master mix (Roche Applied Science, Penzberg, Germany). 2 microglobulin was used as the housekeeping gene. Messenger RNA levels of 2 microglobulin were similar in both interventions. The fold change was calculated using the 2Ct method; Ct is the difference between the average Ct for the target gene and the house keeping gene at time x minus the difference between Ct for the target gene and the house keeping gene at baseline (GH bolus study) or at the control day (GH infusion study). Detailed information regarding primer sequences is shown in the supplementary data.
Western blot analyses were performed using standard protocols and commercially available antibodies. All samples were homogenized in a buffer with a 7.4 pH level and containing 50 mM HEPES, 20 mM NaF, 2 mM Na3VO4, 5 mM EDTA, HALT, 5 mM NAM, 10 M TSA, SDS 5%, and demineralized water. Samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g for 20 min. SDS-PAGE was performed on 415% Criterion TGX Stain-Free Precast Gels (Bio-Rad). Detailed information regarding the antibodies is shown in the supplementary data. PKA phosphorylation of PLIN1 as well as overall PKA substrate phosphorylation were analyzed. Protein levels are expressed as a ratio to -actin content in the sample. Protein phosphorylation is expressed as a ratio to total protein level.
The levels of ERK 1/2 phosphorylation and FSP27 were measured by capillary electrophoresis immunoassay (Wes; ProteinSimple, Santa Clara, CA) as previously described. Information regarding the antibodies is shown in the supplementary data. All antibodies were diluted 1:10 in Antibody Dilution (ProteinSimple). AT biopsies were homogenized in a buffer containing 50 mM HEPES, 137 mM NaCl, 10 mM Na4P2O7, 20 mM NaF, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, NP-40, 2 mM NaOV, 5 mM NAM, 10 M TSA, NP-40, HALT, glycerol and demineralized water. After 1 h of agitation at 37 °C, the samples were spun at 1300 RPM for 20 min and the infranatant was used. Protein concentration was measured with a BCA assay. Samples were vortex mixed and heated at 95 °C for 5 min. Protein expression was quantified as peak area for the protein of interest. FSP27 is expressed as a ratio to -actin content in the sample. ERK phosphorylation is expressed as a ratio to total protein expression of ERK.
Bovine GH (bGH) transgene mice, Stat5N/N mice and wild type mice were housed at 22 °C under a 14-h light, 10-h darkness cycle, 34 mice per cage and ad libitum access to water and standard laboratory chow (ProLab RMH 3000). All mice were males, 6 weeks of age, with a C57BL/6 background, and raised at the Ohio University animal facility. The control mice were age-matched C57BL/6 mice. All mice experiments were approved by the Ohio University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
3T3-L1 adipocytes were grown and differentiated as previously described. 3T3-L1 (from ATCC: CL-173; passages 412) were grown in DMEM, high glucose (4.5 g/L), Glutamax, Pen-Strep and 10% FBS and then seeded at 200,000 cells/well in six-well plates for differentiation into adipocytes. The medium was replaced by differentiation medium, and, after 2 days, the medium was replaced with growth medium. Glycerol release was measured as an estimation of lipolysis.
Analyses of gene expression were conducted as previously described. RNA was extracted by TRIzol Reagent (Life Technologies) and quantified by measuring absorbance at 260 and 280 nm. TBP primers: 5-ACCCTTCACCAATGACTCCTATG-3 5-TGACTGCAGCAAATCGCTTGG-3.
293T cells were transfected with polyethylenimine (PEI) transfection reagent while still in suspension in 96-well plates. Each well was transfected with 50 ng of a previously described G0S2 luciferase construct, together with a total of 50 ng of expression plasmids containing STAT5A, STAT5B or empty vector controls and 10 ng of Renilla-TK plasmid. The cells were harvested 24 h later and luciferase activity was measured using a Dual Renilla Luciferase II Assay Kit and normalized to Renilla luciferase measurements (Promega). Site-directed mutagenesis of the G0S2 constructs by PCR was performed. The reporter vector was co-transfected with either a vector control or 25 ng of PPAR expression vector and 25 ng of the obligate heterodimer RXR.
Effects of GH over time in the human studies were analyzed by a repeated measurement mixed effects model analysis using the Restricted Maximum Likelihood method in STATA (version 14.2, StataCorp). In the GH bolus study, the model included intervention (GH versus pegvisomant), sample time (t = 0300), visit (first or second study day), order of intervention, and the interaction between intervention and sample time as fixed effects. In the GH infusion study, the model included infusion (GH versus control), fasting (overnight versus 36 h fasting), sample time (basal or clamp), visit, and all possible interactions between infusion, fasting and sample time as fixed effects. In both studies, visit nested within subject was used as random effect, and time nested within visit was treated as repeated measurements using a covariance matrix with independent and identically distributed Gaussian residuals with one common variance within visit nested within subject. Data from mouse and in vitro studies were analyzed by t tests (compared to WT, baseline or control). Normal distribution was assessed by inspecting QQ-plots of the residuals. To obtain normal distribution of the residuals, variables were transformed by logarithmic transformation if necessary.
To account for unbalanced data sets because of missing observations, Kenward Roger's approximation was used for calculation of degrees of freedom in all models. Linear pairwise comparisons based on t-tests were performed to compare differences within and between treatment groups. Adrenaline data from one visit of one subject were excluded from the data analysis due to a vasovagal reaction from which the participant rapidly recovered.
Data from the blood samples are presented as mean  SEM from raw data, data from q-PCR and WB are presented as estimated means  the confidence intervals (CI) and data from mouse and in vitro experiments are presented as mean  SEM from raw data. The graphical presentations were performed with SigmaPlot (version 11.0, Systat Software Inc.). All analyses were performed as two-tailed tests and p-values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.