In this single-arm clinical trial, 13 patients with refractory RA receiving the maximum approved dose of conventional DMARDs were recruited from July 2016 to October 2017 at Imam Reza Hospital, Mashhad, Iran, according to the inclusion criteria previously described. All patients provided informed consent to register in the clinical trial. For details about the ethical approval and clinical trial registration, please refer to our previous study.
Autologous BM-MSC preparation and transplantation for the 13 patients with refractory RA were performed by our team according to the protocol delineated in our recent publication. A single dose of autologous BM-MSCs (1  106 per kg of body weight) was injected intravenously in all 13 patients who were followed up at 1, 6, and 12 months after the intervention to evaluate immunological factors.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated by Lymphocyte-H (Cedarlane, Canada) and adjusted to 2  106 cells/ml in a RPMI1640 medium (Caisson, USA) consisting of 1% Pen/Strep (Caisson) and 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco, USA). PBMCs were then cultured in polystyrene plates (SPL, South Korea) with phytohaemagglutinin (PHA, 5g/ml) (Biowest, USA), which were put for incubation for 18 hours, in a humidified CO2 incubator at 37°C to assess the gene expression levels of transcription factors, and 72 hours to evaluate cytokine production.
Total RNA extraction was done using a Total RNA Purification Mini kit (Favorgen, Taiwan), and cDNA was then synthesized by a cDNA Synthesis Kit (Favorgen), according to the manufacturer's information.
Forward and reverse primers for forkhead box P3 (FOXP3), GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3), T-bet and retinoic acid-related orphan receptor gamma t (ROR-t) as the target genes, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) as the housekeeping gene were developed in-house employing Beacon Designer 7.9 (Premier Biosoft International, USA) (Table 1); next, they were blasted at the NCBI website (Primer-BLAST) to check the specificity. Real-time PCR was carried out on cDNA samples in a Rotor-Gene 6000 real-time analyzer (QIAGEN, Germany) using SYBR Premix EX Taq II (2x) (Takara Bio Inc., Japan). Details of PCR conditions would be available upon request. Expression of transcription factors at mRNA levels were calculated employing the 2-CT method and presented as a relative expression related to before mesenchymal stem cell transplantation (MSCT).
The levels of TNF-, IFN-, IL-10, IL-4, and IL-17A in a supernatant of PBMCs cultured in the presence of PHA were determined by commercially obtainable enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits (BioLegend, USA). The ELISA kit for TGF- was purchased from Cloud-Clone Corp., USA, to detect this cytokine in culture supernatants. The ELISA procedures for all cytokines were carried out following the manufacturer's information. The detection limit was >2pg/ml for TNF-, IL-4, IL-10, and IL-17A; >4pg/ml for IFN-; and >5.8pg/ml for TGF-.
For comparing pre- and postintervention findings regarding the immunological and clinical factors, the generalized estimating equation (GEE) analytical method was employed. Pearson's correlation analysis was performed to analyze the correlation between the disease activity score 28-erythrocyte sedimentation rate (DAS28-ESR) and supernatant levels of cytokines. All analyses were done with IBM SPSS Statistics 21 (IBM Corp, USA). P value < 0.05 was defined as statistically significant.