The clinical study undertaken in Ghana was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research and the Ghana Health Services and reviewed by DMID, NIAID (NIH). After informing parents/guardians about the studys objectives, methods, anticipated benefits, and potential hazards, study subjects were recruited. The parents/guardians were encouraged to ask questions about any aspect of the study that was unclear to them and informed about their liberty to withdraw their children at any time without penalty. Children were enrolled only after written parental consent had been obtained. All patient information was treated as confidential. The Volunteer Infection Study (VIS) was reviewed and approved by the QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute Human Research Ethics Committee, and all participants gave written informed consent before inclusion in the study. The study was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02431650), and has been reported previously. The current exploratory study was approved by the QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute Human Research Ethics Committee reference number P3498. The inclusion of VIS participants in this study was based on the consent for future research and the availability of RNA material.
Blood samples of children (13yrs) with symptomatic malaria, were collected at the Ewim Health Center in Cape Coast, Ghana, as part of a study evaluating ex vivo gametocyte production. In brief, parental consent was obtained for children (13yrs) with P. falciparum parasitemia ranging between 1000 and 250,000per µl of blood to donate 5ml of blood to evaluate hemoglobin levels, white blood cell count, and plasma components as well as the parasite population. The childs age, sex, and axillary temperature were also recorded. For the asymptomatic malaria study, children (5 to 13yrs) attending schools at Simiw (Komenda Edina Eguafu Abirem District in the Central Region of Ghana) were recruited. The survey was conducted at the end (November 2017) and peak (July 2018) of the malaria transmission seasons. During both surveys, children were asymptomatic (afebrile with no other malaria-related symptoms). One milliliter of venous blood was drawn from each subject and an aliquot used to prepare blood smears and spot HRP2 based malaria RDTs. Subsequently, plasma was separated and stored at 80°C. In total, 100µl packed RBCs, which is equivalent to ~250µl whole blood (depending on the hematocrit), were preserved in NucleoZOL for RNA analysis.
All parasite strains (NF54, E5.ap2-g.dd, Pfgdv1.gfp.dd) were cultured in a complete RPMI medium containing RPMI 1640, 25mM HEPES, 100gml1 of hypoxanthine, and 0.3mgml1 of glutamine (KD Biomedical, Columbia, MD) supplemented with 25mM NaHCO3 (pH 7.3), 5gml1 of gentamicin, and 10% human serum (Interstate Blood Bank, Memphis, TN). Transformed lines were maintained in 2.5nM WR99210 (WR) (Jacobus Pharmaceuticals, Plainsboro, NJ). Sorbitol treatment (5%, 1030min at 37°C) was used for synchronizing parasites at the ring-stage. Parasitemia was evaluated through microscopy after Giemsa staining smears. Parasite clones isolated from Ghanaian clinical samples (592, 607, 565, and 683) were grown in complete RPMI medium as described except 10% human serum which was substituted with 0.5% Albumax-II+2% human serum. In vitro and ex vivo gametocyte assays were described previously in full detail and used to define the cutoffs for H- and L-GCR as>2% and <0.1%, respectively.
An Agilent microarray containing probes for 5254P. falciparum 3D7 transcripts arrayed in 15,000 spots was probed with RNA isolated from the 2016 H-GCR and the L-GCR whole-blood samples at the Johns Hopkins core facility [http://www.microarray.jhmi.edu/], and the normalized data were sent to USU for further analysis. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated to control for multiple comparisons using the q-value method (FDR q-value). A Morpheus web-based tool [https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus/] was used to generate the heatmap and to determine the hierarchical clusters of the blood samples based on the expression profile of 29 genes expressed differentially (n=18) or similarly (n=11) between H and L-GCR groups. The clustering pattern remained consistent when generated using only differentially expressed or using all 29 genes. Euclidean distance and average linkages between all pairs of samples were used to determine cluster distances.
RNA was extracted from parasites preserved in NucleoZOL (MACHEREY-NAGEL, USA) or Paxgene tubes (BD Biosciences) using RNeasy Micro kit (Qiagen, Germany) or Paxgene RNA kit (Qiagen, Germany), respectively, as per the manufacturers instructions. RNA was eluted in 80µl and 36µl RNAse-free water from Paxgene RNA kit and RNeasy Micro kit, respectively. Purified RNA (8.0µl) was additionally treated with ezDNAse„¢ before cDNA synthesis using SuperScript„¢ IV VILO„¢ Master Mix (Invitrogen, USA). 1:10 dilution of cDNA was made and 2µl from this dilution was used for each RT-qPCR well. RT-qPCR (QuantStudio3) was performed to quantify transcript levels using gene-specific primers and probes (Supplementary Tables 2 and 3). Thermal cycling conditions for Fast SYBR Green PCR Master Mix were described earlier, whereas the TaqMan„¢ fast advanced master mix (Applied Biosystems, USA) thermal cycling conditions were 20s activation at 95°C, 40 cycles of 1s at 95°C and 20s at 60°C. All samples were run in duplicate and tested for both the gene of interest and the control constitutive gene, pf18s rRNA or sbp1, on the same plate. These data were analyzed using QuantStudio„¢ Design & Analysis Software v1.3.1, and the Ct values were determined by subtracting the mean cycle threshold (Ct) value for pf18s rRNA or sbp1 from the mean Ct of each test gene. The relative quantity (2Ct) was calculated for each gene using RNA from NF54gdv1.gfp.dd parasites were grown in the absence of Shld1, as described earlier. Primers were designed using the web-based tool Primer3Plus. DNA sequence of each gene was downloaded from the Plasmodium genome database (PlasmoDB). Primer efficiency was tested by serial dilution and ranged from 85 to 105%.
Details of the study design and participants were published previously along with the primary and secondary outcomes. In brief, four subjects enrolled in the OZGAM open-label clinical trial were selected for the current study based on the availability of RNA samples. Malaria-naive adults were inoculated with ~2800P. falciparum 3D7 parasites. Total parasitemia and gametocytemia were evaluated using pf18s rRNA qPCR and pfs25 RT-qPCR, respectively. Two of these subjects received OZGAM (500mg; formerly known as OZ439) on day 25 post-inoculation and the other two received Primaquine, 15mg on day 24 and 45mg on day 29 post-inoculation. In this study, only parasite RNA samples collected at different time points were used to validate GCR prediction of gc-ring biomarkers.
All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 7.00 statistical package, except Intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) and receiver-operating characteristics (ROC) curve analysis which were done using SPSS v24. All comparisons between H- and L-GCR groups were analyzed using a nonparametric unpaired t test (MannWhitney). Pearson correlation coefficient was analyzed using Microsoft excel.
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.