Freshly collected or frozen bone marrow (BM) or peripheral blood (PB) samples were obtained from AML patients or healthy donors in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and was approved by the Guangzhou Women and Children Medical Center Ethics Committee (ethics number: 2020-39500). All patients were risk-classified according to the latest World Health Organization (WHO) classification. The medical history of AML patients and healthy control subjects was obtained, and all patients provided written informed consent. Mononuclear cells (MNCs) from PB and BM samples were obtained using Human Mononuclear Cells Separation Medium 1.077 (Dongfang Huahui) and used for subsequent experiments. Normal samples correspond to steady-state serum and BM samples from healthy donors were collected after informed consent.
For in vitro studies, both IL-33 (Sino Biological) and anti-IL-33 antibody (Biovision) were used at 100 ng/ml, and SB203580 used at 20 M. The human AML cell line HL-60, BMMCs, and PBMCs were grown in RPMI1640 (ATCC) supplemented with 20% FBS, 2mM L-Glutamine, and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. All cells were grown at 37°C and 5% CO2.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (4A Biotech) was performed on cell culture supernatant and serum in AML patients and the healthy donors according to the manufacturers protocol. Briefly, the samples and the standard samples were incubated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated antibodies. The substrate TMB was added which became blue under the catalytic action of peroxidase. Absorbance was measured at 450 nm. The specific concentrations were calculated by using the software program CurveExpert version 1.4.
The in vitro IL-6 levels were evaluated in the collected supernatants using a cytometric bead array (CBA) for human IL-6 cytokine (BD Biosciences). The data were acquired using a CytoFlex S cytometer (Beckman Coulter) and analyzed by CytExpert 2.3 software (Beckman Coulter).
Total RNA was isolated from cells using AG RNAex Pro Reagent (ACCURATE BIOTECHNOLOGY) according to the manufacturers specifications, synthesized into cDNA using reverse transcription PCR (ACCURATE BIOTECHNOLOGY). Real-time quantitative analysis (qRT-PCR) was performed using SYBR Green Premix Pro Taq HS qPCR Kit (ACCURATE BIOTECHNOLOGY) with specific primers for Actb, and IL-6 (ACCURATE BIOTECHNOLOGY). The real-time PCR was run on a LightCycler 96 Instrument (Roche). Expression levels of genes were normalized to Actb mRNA. The 2CT method was used to compare the relative expression levels of mRNA among different groups. Primers used for quantitative PCR include IL-6f: 5-TGAACTCCTTCTCCACAAGCG-3 and IL-6r: 5-TGGAATCTTCTCCTGGGGGTA-3. Actbf:5-GGATGCAGAAGGAGATCACTG-3 and Actbr:5-CGATCCACACGGAGTACTTG-3).
Total proteins were extracted with the SDS lysis buffer (Beyotime) or RIPA buffer (KeyGEN). Samples were subjected to electrophoresis in SDS-PAGE gels and then transferred to a PVDF membrane (Millipore) for antibody blotting. The membrane was incubated with the primary antibody overnight, followed by 1-h incubation with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-rabbit or anti-mouse secondary antibodies at room temperature, washed and incubated with chemiluminescence (ECL) reagent (Beyotime). The following primary antibodies were used for Western blotting: anti-p-p38 MAPK (Immunoway), anti-p38 (Immunoway), anti-pATF2 (Immunoway) and GAPDH (Abways). Protein bands were quantified by densitometric scanning and normalized to the GAPDH loading control. For full scans of Western blots see  Supplemental Figures S2S4 .
Primary samples were stained with APC conjugated anti-IL1RL1 (BD Biosciences). For the measurement of apoptosis, we used the FITC-conjugated Annexin V (Procell). Cells were analyzed using CytoFlex S (Beckman Coulter) within 1 h. Cell cycle was determined by propidium iodide (PI) staining after cells were fixed with ice-cold 70% ethanol for at least 30 min at 4°C. FACS data was analyzed by CytExpert 2.3 software (Beckman Coulter) and ModFit software (Verity Software).
P-values and Pearsons correlation coefficients were calculated by Prism 8.0.1 (GraphPad software Inc.). The statistical significance of differences in mean values was analyzed by paired t test. One-way ANOVA with Tukey post hoc test was used to perform multiple comparisons between experimental conditions. Data are represented as mean values  standard deviation. P values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.