Supplementary Table 1 summarizes the cell lines and their respective oncogenes. H1781, Calu-3, H2170, A431 and H661 cell lines were acquired from the UC Denver Tissue Culture Core. MDA-MB-175vIII (ATCC HTB-25) were purchased from ATCC. Cell lines were validated by fingerprinting and mycoplasma tested. All cell lines were cultured in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FBS. Gefitinib and afatinib were purchased from Selleck Chemicals (Houston, TX). Tarloxotinib and tarloxotinib-E were designed and synthesized by Jeff Smaill and Adam Patterson (Auckland Cancer Society Research Center; Auckland, New Zealand) and provided by Rain Therapeutics. Antibodies used were as follows: AKT pS437 (4058), total AKT (2920), ERK pT202/Y204 (9101), total ERK (9107), EGFR pY1068 (2234), total EGFR (2232), HER2 Y1221 (2243), HER3 Y1222 (4784) all from Cell Signaling Technologies. Total EGFR (610017) and total HER2 (610161) from BD Transduction Laboratories. Total HER3 and GAPDH (MAB374) from EMD Millipore.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patients prior to collection of the patients tumor samples. The consent form and protocol were reviewed and approved by the Colorado Multiple Institutional Review Board. The patient-derived EGFR exon20 insertion cell lines presented here originated from malignant pleural effusions or ascites fluid. Total cells were isolated from the patients fluid by centrifugation followed by lyses of the red blood cell via a hypotonic solution from Lonza ACK Lysing Buffer (Walkerville,MD). The remaining nucleated cells were then cultured overnight in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FBS in tissue culture dishes to initially select out any adherent stromal cells. The non-adherent cell fraction was further enriched for tumor cells by subtracting out any immune cells using a CD45 magnetic bead depletion kit (Stem Cell Technology, Cambridge, MA). The refined tumor cell mixture was then cultured in RPMI-1640 with 10%FBS until outgrowth of tumor cells. Tumor cells containing the patient tumor sample matched EGFR Exon 20 insertion were confirmed via custom-capture, targeted NGS . Cell lines were designated CUTO14 (CU Thoracic Oncology), CUTO17 and CUTO18. The patient from which CUTO14 was derived was previously treated with carboplatin and pemetrexed chemotherapy only (no prior EGFR-directed therapies). The patient from which CUTO17 was derived was previously treated with cisplatin/pemetrexed, pembrolizumab, then a low dose of an investigational EGFR TKI on a phase 1 clinical trial for less than one month. The patient from which CUTO18 was derived was previously treated with erlotinib and an investigational agent on a clinical trial (best response of disease progression), carboplatin and pemetrexed, then a low dose of an investigational EGFR TKI on a phase 1 clinical trial for less than one month.
Production of lentivirus was performed by co-transfecting pCMV-VSV-G and pCMVR8.2 into 293T cells along with Non-Targeted shRNA Control (SHC002), or two EGFR shRNA (Functional Genomics Facility, University of Colorado; Aurora, CO) using Mirus TransIT-293 reagent according to the manufacturers protocol. Viral supernatants were collected 48hrs after transfection and added to different cell lines.
Cells were lysed in T-PER Tissue Protein Extraction Reagent (ThermoScientific, MA) supplemented with Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail. Proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by Western blot using the indicated primary antibodies. Protein detection was achieved by imagining with an Odyssey Imager and Image Studio software (LI-COR Biotechnology).
Kinase profiling of tarloxotinib-E was performed by Reaction Biology (Malvern, PA). Tarloxotinib-E was tested against a panel of kinases in 10-dose IC50 duplicate mode with a 4-fold serial dilution starting at 100 uM. Reactions were carried out with 33P-ATP for 2 hrs. The remaining radioactive phosphorylated substrate was measured. IC50 values were obtained using Prism Software (GraphPad).
Proliferation for the EGFR shRNA experiments was evaluated using the IncuCyte Live-cell Analysis System. Briefly, CUTO14, CUTO17, and CUTO18, cells were plated in a 96 well, infected with the above lentiviral vectors and the plate was transferred to the IncuCyte. The IncuCyte system enables automated quantification of cell proliferation by automatically gathering and analyzing images through time. Growth curves using the IncuCyte were generated by confluence imaging every four hours by triplicate for a total of 72 hours. Data was analyzed using IncuCyte Zoom software to evaluate proliferation base on the percentage of confluency per well.
Proliferation assays to measure drug effect were performed in media supplemented with 10% FBS. Cell were seeded at a density of 2  103 cells per well in a 96-well plate and treated with the indicated doses of inhibitors for 72hrs. MTS assays were performed according to the manufacturers instructions (CellTiter 96 Aqueous One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay, Promega). Each experiment was performed in triplicate and repeated at least three times. Data was analyzed in Prism software (GraphPad).
The IncuCyte caspase 3/7 green apoptosis assay reagent was employed to detect apoptosis in real time. Cell were seeded at a density of 2  103 cells per well in a 96-well plate, the following day cells were treated with the indicated doses of inhibitors and the apoptosis reagent. Plates were immediately placed in the IncuCyte System, after 30 min to allow the plate to warm scanning was started. Pictures were taken every 4 hours for a total of 4 days. The analysis of the image was done using the IncuCyte software.
All studies involving animals were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee Office of the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus. Cells were re-suspended in 1:1 (v/v) media and matrigel for subcutaneous flank implantation (3  106 cells/0.1 ml). Tumor growth was monitored once a week by bilateral caliper measurements; once tumors reached 0.150.25 cm3, mice were randomized into vehicle or treatment groups (710 mice per group, with two flank tumors each mouse). Dose regimens were as follows: afatinib, dosed 6mg/kg once daily by oral gavage for 4 weeks; tarloxotinib, dosed 48 mg/kg or 26 mg/kg once a week by intraperitoneal injection for 4 weeks and vehicle (20% v/v 2-hydroxypropyl-Beta-cyclodextrin). Tumor growth inhibition from start of treatment was assessed by comparison of the mean change in tumor volume for the control and treated groups. Statistical significance was evaluated using an ANOVA test (Graph Pad Prism). Mice were weighed at least once a week during treatment and percent of weight change was calculated.
Slides were de-paraffinized in xylene and rehydrated in graded concentrations of ethanol before antigen retrieval (EnVision FLEX Target retrieval solution high pH) in a pressure cooker at 121°F for 10 minutes. Next, the slides were cooled for 20 minutes before washing in TBS-0.1%Tween. They were then treated with Duolink blocking solution (Sigma) for 30 minutes at 37oC. The samples were incubated with primary antibodies: hypoxyprobe kit Mab1 antibody and cytokeratin (abcam ab217916) overnight at 4oC followed by fluorescent tag secondary antibodies (Biotium, 488 donkey anti-mouse and Invitrogen alexa 647) plus DAPI (Thermofisher) for 1 hour at room temperature. Slides were then washed and mounted (Fluoroshield mountain media, Abcam).
Slides were analyzed using an IX83 Olympus microscope, pictures were taken at 20X and quantification was done using cellSens (Olympus) and ImageJ software. Each tumor image was separated in channels (red:cytokeratin, green:hypoxia and blue:DAPI). Area of each channel was measured, and percent was calculated based on the total area of the tumor. Data is presented as average  SEM.
Tarloxotinib (48 mg/kg) was administered by intraperitoneal injection once. At the indicated times after the dose mice were euthanized by CO2 inhalation and cervical dislocation. Blood samples were obtained directly from the heart, heparinized blood was immediately centrifuged at 800g for 10 minutes. The supernatant layer of the blood was collected as plasma.
For tumor tissue was also collected at the indicated times. Tumor tissue was excised, divided in half by scalpel and one half was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen while the second was fixed in formalin for other studies. Tissue in liquid nitrogen was used for analysis. Here, plasma (10 L) or frozen tissue (~100 mg) was mixed with 4 volumes of ice-cold acetonitrile containing deuterated internal standards (ISDs). Tissue samples were subject to additional steps of homogenisation (Tissuelyser II, Qiagen) and extraction (Heidolph Multi Reax, Germany). All samples were centrifuged and clear supernatants mixed (1:2) with 45mM ammonium formate buffer pH 4.5 before loading (Agilent 1100 autosampler) onto LC system (5m Zorbax SB-C18 column, Agilent) with mobile phase 0.01% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile-20% water, v/v (solvent A), and 0.01% formic acid in water (solvent B); linear gradient with 9 min run time. Mass spectrometric detection (Agilent 6410 triple quadrupole) utilized positive electrospray ionization parameters optimized for positively charged ions representing the ([M+H]+) for tarloxotinib, tarloxotinib-E, and their respective ISDs. Agilent MassHunter software (v.4.04.00) was used for data acquisition and chromatographic peak integration with standard curves (0.005 mol/L to 30 mol/L) prepared in mouse plasma to estimate the concentration of tarloxotinib, tarloxotinib-E in the samples.
Mice were given 6 mg/kg of afatinib by oral gavage and blood was collected at the indicated times following the protocol previously described. Analysis of the plasma was done by the CU Cancer Center Pharmacology Shared Resource (PharmSR).
NCT03805841 is an ongoing multi-center phase 2 study evaluating the efficacy of tarloxotinib in selected patients with oncogenic alterations in EGFR, HER2, HER4 or NRG1 and metastatic or advanced NSCLC or other solid tumors. The study is approved by Institutional Review Boards at all institutions that enroll patients, and eligible patients provided written informed consent to participate. The study is sponsored by Rain Therapeutics and is conducted in accordance with the in compliance with Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and with the Declaration of Helsinki.