The STAyCIS trial is a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre study evaluating the efficacy and safety of atorvastatin (Lipitor, Pfizer, 80mg/day) in patients with clinically isolated syndrome (a first demyelinating event) and at high risk of conversion to RRMS. Written informed consent was obtained from patients prior to enrolment in the STAyCIS study (NCT00094172). Eighty-two participants were recruited within a screening phase of 90 days from the index CIS event and followed up for 18 months (12 months treatment phase) with serial clinical and radiological (MRI imaging) review. The primary combined endpoint was the development of either radiological (¥3 new T2 MRI lesions) or clinical relapse (¥1 clinical exacerbation) during the 12-month treatment phase. The trial was sponsored by NIAID in collaboration with the Immune Tolerance Network (clinicaltrials.gov NCT00094172).
The study was approved by institutional review boards at 14 centres in the United States and Canada. Written informed consent was obtained from patients prior to enrolment in the STAyCIS study (NCT00094172).
Fifty-six STAyCIS PBMC samples for which viable cells were available were isolated from peripheral blood by centrifugation over Histopaque (Invitrogen) before controlled freezing at 1°C/min (with isopropyl alcohol, Nalgene) and storage in buffer (10%FBS/DMSO) in liquid nitrogen. Frozen samples were rapidly thawed in the presence of endonucleases (Benzonase, Merck) at 37°C, stained with anti-CD8 microbeads (Miltenyi) and enriched using a MACS column (Miltenyi).
Aliquots of total RNA (200ng) were labelled using Ambion WT sense Target labelling kit and hybridised to Human Gene 1.0 Arrays (Affymetrix) following the manufacturers instructions. After washing, arrays were scanned using a GS 3000 scanner (Affymetrix) and CEL files were imported into RStudio (version 3.5.1) for QC and analysis. Affymetrix raw data (.CEL) files were imported into R and subjected to variance stabilisation normalisation using the VSN package in BioConductor. Quality control was performed using the Bioconductor package arrayQualityMetrics with correction for batch variation performed using the Bioconductor package ComBat. Differential expression was conducted using the Bioconductor package limma in R. Samples identified as outliers during QC filtering were excluded, resulting in 44 samples being taken forward for further network analyses (Supplementary Fig. 2).
To generate a transcriptional signature specific to NK8+ cells (Supplementary Data 3), 50ml of peripheral whole blood was collected from five healthy volunteers, from which PBMC were isolated by centrifugation over Histopaque (Invitrogen). NK8+ (CD3CD56+CD8+), NK8 (CD3CD56+CD8) and CD3+8+ T cells were isolated by flow sorting following staining with anti-CD56 (Clone REA196), anti-CD8a Fab (Clone BW135/80 Fab) and anti-CD3 REA (Clone REA641) antibodies. Cells were sorted into RNAlysis medium (Tempus Blood RNA Tubes, ThermoFisher) and total RNA was extracted from each cell population using an RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) with quality assessed using an Agilent BioAnalyser 2100 and RNA quantification performed using a NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer. cDNA libraries were generated using the SMARTer stranded total RNAseq kit (Takara) with RNAsequencing performed on an Illumina HiSeq4000 instrument following the manufacturers instructions. Sequences were processed, cleaned and aligned using a combination of bbsplit, hisat2 and trimgalore with count data read into R using the subRead package (Bioconductor). Normalisation and transformation were undertaken using edgeR and voom packages for Bioconductor in R with pairwise differential expression analysis (FDR threshold 5%) using edgeR.
Data QC was ensured using the arrayQualitymetrics (microarray) and fastqc, qorts and pcaexplorer (RNAseq) packages for Bioconductor in R.
Unsupervised identification of co-correlated genes was undertaken using the Weighted Gene Coexpression Network Analysis Bioconductor package in R. Normalised, log-transformed expression data were variance filtered using the median absolute deviation and a soft thresholding power was chosen based on the criterion of approximate scale-free topology. Gene networks were constructed and modules identified from the resulting topological overlap matrix with a dissimilarity correlation threshold of 0.01 used to merge module boundaries with a specified minimum module size of n=30. Modules were summarised as a network of modular eigengenes, which were then correlated with a matrix of clinical variables (Supplementary Data 1 and Supplementary Figure 2). Significance of correlation between a given clinical trait and a modular eigengene was assessed using linear regression with Bonferroni adjustment to correct for multiple testing. Modular signatures were compared to clinical laboratory measures, supporting clinical data and the time to the primary and secondary endpoints of the STAyCIS study (Supplementary Fig. 2 and Fig. 1). Overlap of signatures with modules derived from network analysis (Supplementary Fig. 1F) used a proportional representation method defined by the following formula to allow correction for variable module size: (signature genes in module, n)/(genes in module, n)100. Hierarchical clustering was performed using a Pearson correlation distance metric and average linkage analysis performed using Genepattern.
Modular signatures were compared against cell and tissue-specific signatures as defined in the Human Gene Atlas (HGA, GSE1133) and Immune Response In Silico (IRIS, GSE22886) datasets. In brief, these datasets have defined cell and/or tissue-specific patterns of gene expression comparing across data from 79 human/61 murine tissues (HGA) and 22 immune cell subsets (IRIS), respectively. Outcome- associated modular signatures were compared to all cell/tissue types to confirm specificity, and radarplots shown (Fig. 1) include comparison against all tissues with at least one overlapping transcript. Enrichment analyses were performed using Enrichr or fgsea (Bioconductor) with a significance threshold of 5% FDR.
Primary human NK cells and CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were separated from leucocyte cones obtained from NHS Blood and Transplant (Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, UK) by centrifugation over ficoll and either positive selection using magnetic beads (MACS, Miltenyi) according to the manufacturers instructions or by flow cytometric sorting (NK cell subsets CD356+ CD8+/, Supplementary Fig. 9), using anti-CD56 (Clone REA196), anti-CD8a Fab (Clone BW135/80 Fab) and anti-CD3 REA (Clone REA641). Purity of separated cell subsets was determined by three-colour flow cytometry and purified T cells were labelled with 10µM CFSE (Invitrogen) and resuspended in complete RPMI 1640 (Sigma Aldrich) in the presence of 10% FCS. Purified CD4+ and CD8+ T cells (>95%) were then stimulated in sterile, U-bottomed culture plates (Greiner) using microbead particles conjugated to anti-CD2/3/28 antibodies (1:2 bead:cell ratio, Miltenyi) in the presence of IL2 (10ng/ml, Gibco Life Technologies) for 6 days.
Natural killer cells were cultured in the presence of autologous stimulated CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells or target K562 or Jurkat T cells as indicated for 6 days with or without titrated range (0.1-0.2 µg/ml) of soluble HLA-G (Abcam) before analysis. Flow cytometry analysis of cultured cells comprised panels including Live/Dead Blue reactive dye (Life Technologies), anti-CD56 (Clone REA196), anti-CD8a Fab (Clone BW135/80 Fab), anti-CD3 REA (Clone REA641), anti-CD107 (Biolegend, Clone H4A3, used following Brefeldin A protein transport blockade, eBiosciences), anti-HLADR (Clone L243), Granzyme B (Biolegend, clone GB11), Perforin (eBioscience, eBioOMAK-D) and anti-HLAG (Biolegend, clone 87G) as indicated.
For NK coculture with autologous T cells, it was necessary to account for variable simulation bead:target cell ratio occurring due to titration of increasing numbers of NK cells into culture. Consequently, the ratio of NK activation (CD107 MFI) seen with NK8+ cells was compared to that seen on coculture with a comparable number of NK8 cells (Fig. 3).
Heparinised peripheral blood samples were obtained for analysis of lymphocyte populations and subpopulations by flow cytometry. Whole blood was collected in sodium heparin vacutainers (Becton Dickinson) and shipped ambient overnight to the ITN Flow Cytometry Core (Roswell Park Cancer Institute). Using a stain-lyse method, cells from blinded samples were labelled with 5-colour monoclonal antibody panels using anti-human CD8PE-Cy5, CD57-FITC (clone NK-1), CD56-PE (clone NCA-1) CD14-APC (clone MÏ•P9), plus CD3-PE-Cy7 (clone SK7, all BD Biosciences). Following staining, data were acquired on a FACSCanto flow cytometer (BD Biosciences), and analysed using WinLists„¢ (http://www.vsh.com) FCOM function.
A validated panel of KIR receptors was used to quantify NK cell subset expression of activating and inhibitory receptors for which clone ids and reagent sources are detailed in Supplementary Data 4. Flow analysis was undertaken using an LSR Fortessa (BD) in the NIHR Cambridge BRC flow phenotyping hub (Supplementary Fig. 9).
Transmission electron microscopy was undertaken on purified, pooled NK cell subsets sorted as above and processed at the Cambridge Advanced Imaging Centre. Lytic granules were counted and cell size quantified in at least 10 images from each of NK8+ and NK8 subsets from each of three biological replicates (Supplementary Fig. 5).
Optimal surrogate markers for identification of the NK8+ signature in PBMC-level data were determined using a random forests classification algorithm (Supplementary Fig. 8). The NK8+ signature itself cannot be directly used in a mixed cell population due to the confounding influence of transcripts from other cell types. Expression data derived from both MACS-purified CD8+ cells and PBMC were available for a cohort of n=47 patients anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody associated vasculitis (AAV) following QC and hybridisation to the HsMediante25k custom microarray platform and constituted a training cohort. Normalised, log- transformed expression data were analysed using the ML Interfaces Bioconductor package in R. Using CD8+-level expression data, AAV samples were classified into subgroups showing either high or low expression of the NK8+ signature (as illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 8). Subsequently, PBMC-level data from the same AAV samples were used to identify and rank probes for their ability to discriminate the NK8+-defined subgroups using the variable Importance metric, reflecting the change in accuracy of classification (% change in Gini coefficient, Supplementary Data 5) when that variable is randomly permuted. Optimal probes were then used to identify analogous patient groups in an independent validation cohort of PBMC data from RRMS/CIS patients (GSE15245). For the validation set, data were downloaded from GEO and imported into R using the Bioconductor package GEOquery in R. The validation study represented a prospective collection of 94 PBMC samples taken from CIS/RRMS cases (n=32/62) and followed up to 3.5 years recording clinical relapses (Supplementary Data 7). Microarray data were generated using Hu133A.
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.