This prospective non-randomized study was implemented at the Reproductive Medicine Center of the Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital from August 2017 to December 2018. We enrolled PORs undergoing IVF cycles. The inclusion criteria for POR in this study were defined according to the Bologna criteria, and the subjects had at least two of the three following features: (i) advanced maternal age (¥40 years) or any other risk factor for poor ovarian response; (ii) a previous incidence of POR poor ovarian response ( 3 oocytes with a conventional stimulation protocol); or (iii) an abnormal ovarian reserve test. In this study, an abnormal ovarian reserve test was defined as an antral follicle count (AFC) < 5 or an anti-Mllerian hormone (AMH) concentration < 1 ng/mL. Furthermore, two episodes of a previous POR after maximal stimulation alone would be sufficient to define a patient as a POR. Patients were excluded if they had any of the following: (i) a diagnosis of primary ovarian insufficiency; (ii) a history of oophorectomy; (iii) a history of exposure to cytotoxic agents or pelvic irradiation for malignancy; or (iv) a history of adjuvant supplementation or hormonal replacement therapy during the previous 3 months. The enrolled participants were then divided into two groups: FPOS or LPOS. The choice of LPOS or FPOS depended on the patients' consideration and preference after full consultation provided by a physician.
This study was approved by the institutional review board of Kaohsiung Veterans General (VGHKS15-CT11-12) and Clinical Trial Register (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03238833). All participants were fully counseled, and written informed consent was obtained. This study was in adherence to the approved guidelines and the Declaration of Helsinki.
In the FPOS group, ovarian stimulation with a 300 IU daily dose of combined recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone (rFSH) plus recombinant LH (rLH) (Pergoveris, Merck Serono, Aubonne, Switzerland) commenced within 5 days of the menstrual cycle. In the LPOS group, spontaneous ovulation was confirmed by transvaginal sonography and progesterone levels from day 15 to day 18 of the menstrual cycle. When transvaginal sonography showed absence of dominant follicle and serum progesterone levels were above 1.5 ng/mL, spontaneous ovulation was confirmed. After confirmation of spontaneous ovulation, the women with at least one follicle of less than 8 mm started to undergo ovarian stimulation with a 300 IU daily dose of rFSH plus rLH (Pergoveris, Merck Serono, Aubonne, Switzerland).
In both the FPOS and LPOS groups, when the leading follicle reached 12 mm in diameter, the women received 0.25 mg of GnRH antagonist (Cetrotide; Merck Serono, Idron, France) daily until the day of oocyte trigger. A dual trigger, which comprised a combination of recombinant human chorionic gonadotropin (rHCG) 250 mcg (Ovidrel, Merck Serono, Modugno, Italy) and GnRH agonist 2 mg (Lupro, Nang Kuang Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tainan, Taiwan), was administered when at least one dominant follicle reached 17 mm in diameter. Thirty-six hours after ovulation induction, oocyte retrieval was conducted by transvaginal ultrasound-guided needle aspiration.
Oocytes from all women were inseminated by intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) to diminish the possibility of fertilization failure. Oocytes were denuded and inseminated if the maturation status was verified by the presence of the first polar body. Fertilization was evaluated 18~20 hours after insemination, and success was defined as the presence of two pronuclei. Embryo development and quality were assessed based on the number and symmetry of the blastomeres and the level of embryonic fragmentation according to the criteria established by the Istanbul consensus workshop. All embryos were cryopreserved by vitrification on the third day after oocyte retrieval. An artificial frozen embryo transfer protocol was used for all participants. Oral estradiol (Ediol 8 mg, SynmosaBiopharma Corporation, Hsinchu County, Taiwan) was initiated on the third day of the menstrual cycle, and endometrial thickness was monitored by transvaginal ultrasonography. When the endometrial thickness exceeded 8 mm, luteal support with progesterone, intravaginal gel (crinone 8% gel 90 mg/day, Merck Serono, Hertfordshire, UK) plus oral dydrogesterone (duphaston 40 mg, Abbott, Olst, The Netherlands), was added to oral estradiol. Transabdominal ultrasound-guided embryo transplantation was performed 4 days after commencement of luteal support. The women underwent a pregnancy test 15 days after embryo transfer. If the pregnancy test was positive, oral estradiol was continued until 6 weeks of gestation; progesterone was continued until 8~10 weeks of gestation.
COCs were collected during oocyte aspiration and washed in the medium. CCs were removed mechanically using a sterile scalpel. CCs separated from the same patient's COCs were pooled together for study. Isolated CCs were then transferred immediately into a sterile tube, centrifuged at 200 g for 5 min at room temperature and stored at -80 °C for further study.
CCs were analyzed for the expression of genes related to inflammation (C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 1 [CXCL1], CXCL3, TNF, prostaglandin E synthase [PTGES]), oxidative phosphorylation (NADH ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit B7 [NDUFB7], NDUFA4 mitochondrial complex associated like 2 [NDUFA4L2], SLC25A27), apoptosis (death-associated protein kinase 3 [DAPK3], BCL6B transcription repressor [BCL6B]) and metabolism (phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 1 [PCK1], lactate dehydrogenase C [LDHC]) using real-time quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Gene functions related to reproduction of the included genes are shown in Table S1.
As previously described, total RNA was extracted from CCs with the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Each RNA pool was reverse transcribed to cDNA. To detect mRNA expression, qRT-PCR analysis was performed using an ABI Prism 7700 Sequence Detection System (Perkin-Elmer Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). PCR was performed using the SYBR Green PCR Core Reagents kit (Perkin-Elmer Applied Biosystems). Gene-specific qRT-PCR primers were used are shown in supplemental Table S2. The thermal cycling conditions included an initial denaturation step at 95 °C for 10 min followed by 40 cycles at 95 °C for 15 s and 60 °C for 1 min. Each set of qRT-PCRs was repeated three times. All of the samples with a coefficient of variation for the Ct value > 1% were retested. GAPDH served as the internal control to normalize the expression of target genes. Relative expression levels were calculated for each sample after normalization to GAPDH. Then, the expression levels of FPOS group was set to be 1 and the relative expression levels of LPOS to the FPOS group was calculated.
Total RNA was extracted from the samples using TRIzol Reagent, according to the manufacturer's instructions. Libraries were prepared using the TruSeq Stranded mRNA LT Sample Prep Kit (Illumina), following the manufacturer's instructions. Differential gene expression analysis was carried out with log2 fold change (FC) ¥ 1 or  -1, p < 0.05 and false discovery rate (FDR)  5%.
The primary endpoint was the mRNA expression of CC genes. Secondary outcome measures included the number of retrieved oocytes, metaphase II oocytes, fertilized oocytes, day-3 embryos and top-quality day-3 embryos, biochemical pregnancy rates, clinical pregnancy rates, miscarriage rates and live birth rates. Clinical pregnancy was defined by the presence of fetal cardiac activity in an intrauterine gestational sac by transvaginal ultrasound. Live birth was determined by delivery of a live fetus after 20 weeks of gestation. Miscarriage refers to pregnancy loss before 20 weeks of gestation.
Parametric t-test or non-parametric Mann-Whitney Wilcoxon methods were used as appropriate for quantitative variables. The categorical variables were compared using chi-square tests or Fisher's exact tests. The statistical analysis was carried out using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) version 22.0 (Chicago, IL, USA) for patients' data and Prism version 6.0 (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA) for genes expression. The differences between groups were considered significant when the p value was less than 0.05.