Twelve volunteers, aged between 18 and 65 and weighing between 50 and 84 kg, were recruited from the Athens, Georgia, area. Inclusion and exclusion criteria are listed in Additional File 1. Subjects attended the University of Georgia Clinical and Translational Research Unit (CTRU) twice. They were asked to fast for at least 34 h prior to the first visit. At that visit, they were weighed and allocated to groups by CTRU staff using a block randomization protocol. 18 ml of blood (Samples A) were drawn in a fasting state and subjects were administered 150 µg/kg Stromectol as three or four tablets or the equivalent number of placebo tablets immediately after blood was drawn. Participants remained at CTRU for four hours then another 15 ml of blood (Samples B) was drawn. A third blood sample (18 ml)Samples Cwas drawn 24 h after administration of the drug. All the subjects completed the study. All samples were coded immediately after being taken and all analyses completed blind. Serum was prepared from 5 to 10 ml of blood collected as above but allowed to clot in the absence of heparin or EDTA (incubated for~2 h at room temperature). The liquid fraction of the blood sample was removed to a fresh tube and centrifuged at 10,000g for 5 min. The resulting supernatant was filter sterilized.
Complete blood counts (CBC) were carried out by the Clinical Pathology laboratory at Piedmont Athens Regional Hospital.
Human cytokine and chemokine levels were measured on a Luminex MAGPIX instrument using the Milliplex Human Cytokine/Chemokine Magnetic Bead Premixed 41 Plex Kit (EMD Millipore, Billerica MA, USA). All samples were measured using three technical replicates, with two replicates of all standards and controls.
PBMCs and PMNs were purified, and RNA extracted from cells isolated from each individual subject as described previously. Neutrophils were isolated using the EasySep„¢ Direct Human Neutrophil Isolation Kit (STEMCELL Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada) according to manufacturers instructions. PBMCs were isolated using SepMate„¢-50 Tubes (STEMCELL Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada) according to manufacturers instructions. To remove contaminating platelets, the optional extended wash step (120g for 10 min) of the SepMate„¢ protocol was included. Isolated PMNs and PBMCs were washed in PBS (centrifuged at 300g for 5 min), re-suspended in a 1:1 mixture of RPMI-1640-10 mM HEPES buffer and autologous serum, stored at room temperature, and used within 6 h post-isolation. Cell counts were performed on a 1:10 dilution of each preparation of cells containing 0.4% trypan blue (Gibco, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA) using a BioRad TC10„¢ automated cell counter (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA). To extract RNA, 0.75 ml TRIzol was added per 0.25 ml sample (510106 cells). Cells were lysed by pipetting up and down. Homogenized samples were incubated for 5 min at room temperature. Chloroform (0.2 ml/1 ml TRIzol) was added and the sample shaken for 15 s followed by a 3-min incubation at room temperature. Samples were centrifuged at 12,000g for 15 min at 4 °C. The aqueous phase was removed, and the RNA precipitated by adding 0.5 ml isopropanol (including 15 µg GlycoBlue„¢ coprecipitant, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) to the aqueous phase and incubating at room temperature for 10 min. After centrifugation at 12,000g for 10 min at 4 °C, the supernatant was removed and the pellet washed in 1 ml 75% ethanol per 1 ml TRIzol. After a brief vortex, the sample was centrifuged at 7500g for 5 min (4 °C). Ethanol was removed and the pellet air-dried for 510 min prior to resuspending in RNase-free water. The expression levels of 770 genes for each individual subject were measured on an nCounter SPRINT molecular profiling system, using the nCounter Human Innate Immunity Myeloid Panel.
PBMCs and PMNs were isolated from the samples A and C and incubated with freshly isolated B. malayi Mf as previously described. Briefly, assays were set up in Corning 96-well TC-treated microplates (Millipore-Sigma, Burlington, MA, USA). Four components were added to each well in 50 µl volumes, giving a total volume of 200 µl:~100 B. malayi Mf, autologous serum and either no cells, ~150,000 PMNs, or ~150,000 PBMCs. To create the respective controls, 50 µl of RPMI-1640 was substituted for the relevant component. The tissue culture plates were incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Viable Mf were counted on a Nikon„¢ TS2 microscope (Nikon Instruments Inc., Melville, NY, USA) at 1, 24 and 120 h post-experimental set up. Mf were considered to be ˜viable if there was any detectable movement observed within approximately 1020 s.
The mean numbers of each cell type were calculated for each arm at 24 h post-treatment and compared to those in the pre-treatment samples using a simple t test, with p=<0.05 as the level of significance. Since none of the measurements passed this test, no further analysis was performed. Cytokine levels were obtained from the Luminex data. The mean level plus or minus standard error of each analyte were calculated for each arm at each time point (0, 4, 24 h post-treatment). For the control and ivermectin arms, levels at 4 h and 24 h post-treatment were compared to the levels pre-treatment using simple t tests to determine if any individual results required further investigation, taking p=<0.05 as the level of significance. The change in levels 4 h and 24 h post-treatment were also compared between the placebo- and ivermectin-treated groups. Since none of the individual analyte results met this criterion, no further analysis was carried out. The NanoString data were analysed on the proprietary software, nSolver„¢ (NanoString Technologies, Inc., Seattle, WA, USA). The data passed quality control criteria. The software calculated the log2 geometric mean levels of each mRNA measured and used t tests to determine statistically significant changes in expression between 4 and 24 h post-treatment for the control and ivermectin arms. We also compared the changes in expression at 4 h and 24 h post-treatment between the placebo- and ivermectin-treated groups. The Benjamini-Yekutieli false discovery rate method was used to account for the expectation that significant changes in genes may be correlated with or dependent on each other, and the subsequent resulting false discovery rate adjusted p-value of <0.05 used to determine those changes that were deemed to be statistically significant. In all the analyses, each individual subject was treated as a biological replicate, giving N=4 for the placebo arm and N=8 for the ivermectin arm.
Data supporting the conclusions of this article are included within it. The results are available at ClinicalTrials.gov under record NCT03459794.
Experiments and informed consent procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the University of Georgia (Permit Number 2012-10769). Human subjects recruited under the guidelines of IRB-approved protocols were provided written informed consent. Human blood material was obtained from the Clinical and Translational Research Unit, University of Georgia; experiments and informed consent procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the University of Georgia (STUDY00005069).
Not applicable.