A comprehensive list of all the reagents, kits, antibodies, and primers used in this study can be found in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2.
Specimens, including tumour tissues and matched adjacent normal tissues (¥2cm from the resection margin), were collected from 110 HCC patients who underwent surgical resection in the Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, between November 2008 and October 2010. The HCC patients were between 24 and 79years old (median age was 52years old), and the median follow-up time was 38.2months. The clinicopathological features analysed in this study included postoperative tumour-node-metastasis (TNM) staging and Edmondson-Steiner grading by experienced pathologists. In addition, another batch of liver cancer and adjacent tissue samples were obtained between November 2017 and March 2018. Each of these samples was divided into three parts: one was used to establish a PDX model, one was flash frozen and stored at 80°C for molecular analysis, and one was fixed in formaldehyde for histopathological examination. This study was approved by the ethics committee of The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, and written informed consent was obtained from each patient.
The mRNA expression data of 349 HCC specimens from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database and 240 HCC specimens from the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) database were extracted for analysis. The Phatmap package and the corolot package in R language were used to generate the correlation matrix heat map between the POSTN gene and stemness-related factors.
The GSE1898 dataset includes data of HCC tumour tissues and matched benign tumour-adjacent tissues obtained from 139 individuals (61 Chinese patients and 78 Caucasian patients) by surgical resection. The details of the microarray gene expression profile were reported by Lee JS et al.. The fold change (FC) in the POSTN transcript was calculated as the ratio of the gene expression value in tumour tissues to that in normal tissues, and the mean value in normal tissues was used as the baseline. A log2-transformed tumour/normal value ¥1.0 (i.e., a fold change of tumour vs. normal ¥2) or1.0 indicated an increase or decrease in gene expression, respectively. Spearman rank correlation analysis was used to analyse the correlation between POSTN and stemness-related factors.
Transcriptome sequencing of HCC cell lines with different levels of POSTN gene expression was conducted by GeneChem Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Shanghai (GSAE0154536). The change in the POSTN transcript copy number was calculated based on the ratio of the expression level in tumour tissues to that in normal tissues, and the median value in normal tissues was used as the baseline. The Venn diagram shows the genes associated with the top 50 upregulated genes in Hep3B cells after transfection with control and p-POSTN expression plasmids, the genes associated with the top 50 downregulated genes in HCCLM3 cells after transfection with lentivirus carrying shRNA targeting POSTN and matched scrambled RNA, and 19 genes encoding transcriptional regulators of CD133 as predicted by the TRANSFAC transcription factor prediction database.
All the animal experiments were approved by the Wenzhou Medical University Animal Care and Use Committee. A total of 48 BALB/c nude mice (Laboratory Animal Center, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China) were randomly divided into eight groups with six mice in each group, including four groups that underwent orthotopic implantation of liver cancer cells (Hep3B p-cDNA3.1, Hep3B p-POSTN, LM3 Scr-POSTN, and LM3 Sh-POSTN) and four groups that underwent subcutaneous implantation of tumours. After the mice were anaesthetized, laparotomy was conducted to expose the left lobe of the liver for the orthotopic implantation of liver cancer cells carrying a luciferase reporter gene. After the operation, the growth status of the mice was evaluated weekly, and the fluorescence intensity was measured regularly. For imaging, the mice were intraperitoneally injected with the D-luciferin substrate (15mg/mL) at a dose of 10L/g; 1015min after injection, imaging was performed on the IVIS-SPECTRUM in vivo imaging system (PerkinElmer). The images were analysed, and the fluorescence intensity values after tumour cell inoculation were measured by using in vivo imaging software (Caliper Life Sciences). To establish a subcutaneously transplanted tumour model, the mice were subcutaneously implanted with liver cancer cells in the lateral side of the right hind limb. Tumour growth was monitored by measuring the tumour size twice a week with a Vernier caliper. On the 33rd day after xenograft establishment, all the mice were sacrificed to harvest subcutaneous tumour, lung, and brain tissue samples. The volume of the tumour was determined by using the formula: volume=widthlength0.52. All three tissue types were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin for subsequent IHC analysis. All the animal experiments were strictly conducted according to the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, and prior to the animal experiments, an agreement was drafted based on the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Animal Ethics and Welfare Committee of Wenzhou Medical University.
Fresh tumour tissues extracted from patients in the operating room were cut into small blocks approximately 1mm3 in size under aseptic conditions. The nude mice were anaesthetized with isoflurane and maintained in the anaesthetic state. In a sterile environment, a skin incision approximately 0.5cm long was made on the lateral side of the right hind limb using a sterilized apparatus. The small human tumour tissue blocks were then subcutaneously implanted into the mice, and the skin incision was closed. Tumour growth was monitored regularly by measuring the size of the tumours twice a week with a Vernier caliper. When the tumours grew to approximately 200mm3, the mice were given intragastric administration of lenvatinib (10mg/kg) and intraperitoneal injection of cilengitide (20mg/kg) every 3 days. The body weight and tumour growth of the mice were monitored.
Following the previously described IHC staining protocol, tumour tissues and the corresponding adjacent normal tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde immediately after harvest. After fixation, the tissues were subjected to a series of procedures, including paraffin embedding, sectioning (thickness of 4m), hydration in different concentrations of ethanol after dimethyl benzene dewaxing, antigen repair after washing (boiling in 1 citric acid-disodium hydrogen phosphate buffer), and blocking of the endogenous catalase activity. Then, the sections were stained with antibodies against CD90, CD133, CK19, TWIST, SNAIL, CXCR4, and SMA. Negative controls were established by substituting the primary antibody solutions with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA)/Tris-buffered saline (TBS). Finally, the slides were cover slipped and observed under a microscope.
To semi-quantitatively assess protein expression, the IHC staining intensity was scored from 0 to 3, with 0, 1, 2 and 3 indicating no staining and weak, medium and strong staining, respectively. In addition, the percentage of positive cells was scored as 0 points for less than 5%, 1 point for 625%, 2 points for 2650%, 3 points for 5175%, and 4 points for above 75%. The final staining score was determined by multiplying the staining intensity score by the corresponding positive-cell percentage point. The microvascular density (MVD) was calculated by counting the CD31-positive cells, which were identified by a brown precipitate in the cytoplasm of endothelial cells; the vessels in each section were counted in 5 microscopic fields.
To determine the proportion of CD133+ cells among hepatocellular carcinoma cells, cells were harvested, washed twice with PBS, resuspended in cell staining buffer at a concentration of 5105/100l and incubated on ice for 30min in the dark with FITC-conjugated antibodies against CD133 at a dilution of 1:200. After washing, the cells were sorted by using a BD FACSCalibur. Follow-up analysis was performed using FlowJo Software (Ashland, Kentucky, USA). Positive and negative gates were determined using immunoglobulin G (IgG)-stained and unstained controls.
Total RNA was extracted from cells and HCC specimens using TRIzol reagent and was used for cDNA synthesis after its concentration was determined. Reverse transcription was conducted following the instructions provided in the RevertAid First-Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit. Subsequently, the synthesized cDNA was amplified using SYBR Premix Ex Taq (Perfect Real Time) in an ABI 7300 Real-Time System. The mRNA expression level of each candidate transcription factor was measured and normalized to the expression of 18S ribosomal RNA as an internal reference. The reaction conditions were as follows: 95°C for 10min, followed by 40cycles of 95°C for 15s and 60°C for 60s. The primer sequences are listed in Supplementary Table S2.
Cell or tissue samples were lysed in lysis solution, and the total protein concentration was determined by using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) kit. The samples were loaded into 415% sodium dodecyl sulfate - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS PAGE) gels (30g of protein per lane) for electrophoresis, and then, the proteins were transferred onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes. Next, the membranes were incubated with 5% BSA for 1h to block nonspecific signals and then washed with TBST [10mM tris (pH8.0), 150mM NaCl, and 0.05% Tween 20] three times. Then, the membranes were incubated with primary antibodies against POSTN, FOXP3, c-Myc, AP-2, CD133, av3, TGF1, -actin, or GAPDH overnight at 4°C. The concentrations of the antibodies are listed in Supplementary Table S1. After being thoroughly washed three times with TBST, the membranes were incubated with secondary goat anti-rabbit or goat anti-rat antibodies coupled to horseradish peroxidase at room temperature for 1h, followed by three washes with TBST. Finally, the immune complexes were detected using a HyGLO HRP assay kit and analysed by a gel imaging analysis system. -actin used as the internal control.
After washing three times using PBS with Triton X-100 (PBST), magnetic beads were incubated with anti-av3, anti-TGF1 and IgG antibodies on a shaker at room temperature for 1h and then washed three times with PBST. Next, the antibody-coupled beads were incubated with cellular protein lysates overnight at 4°C. After the supernatant was removed, the beads were washed with PBST three times and incubated with diluted elution buffer at 70°C for 10min. Finally, the pulled down protein complexes were analysed by SDS-PAGE/immunoblotting analysis.
After crosslinking with 1% formaldehyde, the cells were lysed, and the DNA was broken into approximately 600-bp fragments using a Bioruptor 300 (Diagenode). Subsequently, immunoprecipitation was performed using magnetic beads and POSTN antibodies or normal rabbit IgG antibodies to bind the cleaved chromatin. After reversing the formaldehyde cross-linking of the protein and DNA complexes, the immunoprecipitated DNA was purified by using a ChIP column. The identity and quantity of the isolated DNA fragments were determined by PCR using primers designed to amplify the POSTN promoter region, which potentially contained CD133 binding sites. The primer sequences are listed in Supplementary Table S2. A C1000 Thermal Cycler (Bio-Rad) was used for PCR quantification, and each experiment was repeated three times.
Cells were washed with Dulbeccos PBS (D-PBS) and fixed with N,N-dipiperazine containing 2.5% formaldehyde at room temperature for 20min. After fixation, the cells were washed with D-PBS and then blocked with 5% goat serum at 37°C for 1h. Next, the cells were incubated with primary antibodies against POSTN, AP-2, CD133, or TGF1 at 37°C for 1 h. After washing three times with D-PBS, the cells were then incubated with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-mouse IgG and Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG in the dark for 1 h. After three washes, the cells were incubated with 4-6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for 1 min, sealed with Prolong Gold anti-fading reagent, and observed under a confocal microscope. In the negative control group, PBS was used to replace the primary antibodies.
Dual-luciferase reporter plasmids, in which the luciferase reporter gene was inserted downstream of the CD133 promoter region, were synthesized by GeneChem Biotechnology Co., Ltd. The cells were seeded in 24-well plates; when the cells reached approximately 80% confluence, they were co-transfected with plasmids containing the Renilla luciferase gene and reporter gene with Lipofectamine„¢ 3000 for 48h following the instructions. After the medium was discarded, the cells were washed twice with PBS and then lysed in 100l of Passive Lysis Buffer (PLB) on a shaker at room temperature for 30min. Next, 20l of the cell lysates was transferred to an EP tube and gently mixed with 50l of luciferase assay reagent II (LAR II) using a pipette to avoid generating bubbles. The fluorescence assay was performed using a GloMax 20/20 Luminometer (Promega). After detection, the EP tube was removed, and the reaction was quenched by adding 50l of Stop & Glo Reagent. The fluorescence intensity of the internal reference, Renilla luciferase, was measured again.
Cells, including LM3 cells, SNU-387 cells transfected with short hairpin RNA (shRNA) or scrambled (scrRNA) lentiviruses; Hep3B cells, PRF5 cells transfected with p-POSTN or p-cDNA3.1 overexpressed plasmid, were seeded in 96-well plates (5000 cells/well). After 6 h of incubation, the cells were washed with PBS three times. Fresh culture medium containing 0.5% FBS was added. Cell proliferation was assessed by the Cell Counting Kit-8 cell proliferation assay kit, and the absorbance was measured at a wavelength of 450nm. Each experiment was repeated three times.
Cells were seeded in six-well plates at a density of 5103 cells per well, and the medium was changed every 3 days. After 2 weeks of culture, the medium was removed, and the cells were washed with PBS three times to remove the unbound cells. The adherent cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature for 30min and then stained with 0.01% crystal violet for 30min. Cell colonies containing >50 cells were counted. The experiment was repeated three times.
The cells were seeded in Transwell inserts containing Matrigel-coated porous membranes (1104 cells per insert) and cultured in serum-free DMEM. Complete medium containing 10% FBS was added to the lower chamber. After 12h of incubation, the cells remaining in the insert were removed with cotton swabs. The cells that were adherent to the lower side of the membrane were fixed with 10% acetic acid/90% methanol and subjected to haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. For each Transwell membrane, five visual fields with the most migrated cells were selected, and the cells were counted under a microscope at 400 magnification. The experiment was repeated three times.
The cells in each group were evenly seeded into a low-viscosity 96-well plate (500 cells per well) and cultured in DMEM/F12 medium (1:1) containing B27 supplement, antibiotics, epidermal growth factor, basic fibroblast growth factor, hepatocyte growth factor, and 1% methylcellulose. The cells were incubated at 37°C, and the culture medium was changed every 3 days. After 14days of culture, spheres with a diameter>75m were counted.
The data are expressed as the meanstandard deviation (SD) for continuous variables and frequency (percentage) for categorical variables. Students t-test or Mann-Whitney U test were used to compare continuous variables, while the chi-square test or Fishers exact test was used to compare categorical variables between two groups. One-way analysis of variance or Kruskal-Wallis test were used for multiple group comparisons. Kaplan-Meier survival curve analysis was used for survival analysis, and a log-rank method was used to compare survival time between groups. All the statistical tests were two-sided, and a P-value <0.05 was considered statistically significant. All the analyses were conducted using SPSS V22.0 and GraphPad Prism 6 software.
All data and materials supporting the findings of this work are available from its supplementary information files and from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
All the patients were informed of sample collection and usage. The tissue samples were collected and used in accordance with approval by the ethics committee of The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University. Approval for all the mouse experiments was obtained from the Animal Ethics and Welfare Committee of Wenzhou Medical University and all the animal experiments were conducted strictly according to the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and prior to animal experiments.
The authors declare that they agree to submit the article for publication.