The study was carried out at the Siaya District Hospital (SDH) in western Kenya. Falciparum malaria prevalence more than a decade ago was 83% in children between 14 years and has remained stable with an increase in pediatric malaria admissions, particularly from mid-2006 to date. Consequently, SMA remains a significant contributor to hospital-associated morbidity and mortality. Details of the study site and malarial anemia in the pediatric population are described in our previous report.
Children with malaria (n=74) of both genders (age, <36 mos.; male [n=45], female [n=29]) visiting SDH for their first hospital contact were enrolled, after obtaining written informed consent from the parent/legal guardian, to participate in the study. Hb levels (g/dL) were used to group children with falciparum malaria into two groups: (i) non-SMA (Hb¥6.0 g/dL, n=38) and (ii) SMA (Hb<6.0 g/dL, n=36) based on the description of anemia determined by greater than 14,000 longitudinal Hb measurements in age- and gender-matched children from the same geographic location. In addition, to place the current findings into a global context, results are also presented for children grouped according to the World Health Organization (WHO) definition of SMA: non-SMA (Hb¥5.0 g/dL, n=52) and SMA (Hb<5.0 g/dL, n=22). Children were excluded from the study if they had mixed malaria species infections, HIV-1, bacteremia, prior hospitalization (for any reason), antimalarial and/or antipyretic treatment within two weeks prior to enrollment, and CM. Patients were treated and provided supportive care according to the Ministry of Health (MOH)-Kenya guidelines. The study was approved by the Ethics Committees of the Kenya Medical Research Institute and University of New Mexico Institutional Review Board.
Venipuncture blood samples (<3.0 mL) were collected from enrolled participants before any treatment interventions. Complete blood counts were determined using the Beckman Coulter AcT diff2„¢ (Beckman-Counter Corporation, Miami, FL, USA). Asexual malaria trophozoites in thick and thin peripheral blood smears, and reticulocyte count were determined according to previous methods. Since there are known cofounders of anemia in this malaria endemic region, co-infections (i.e., HIV-1 and bacteremia), and sickle-cell status were determined according to our previous methods. Parents/guardians of the study participants received pre- and post-test HIV/AIDS counseling and provided informed consent.
To measure bicyclo-PGE2 levels in plasma and urine samples, a commercial prostaglandin E metabolite (PGEM) kit (Cayman Chemical Company, MI, USA) was used according to the manufacturers instructions. Since PGE2 has a high turnover rate in peripheral circulation, the PGE2 metabolites (13,14-dihydro-15-keto PGA2 and 13,14-dihydro-15-keto PGE2) were converted to single derivatives (stable end product bicyclo-PGE2). Briefly, 250 L of either plasma or urine samples were precipitated in 95% ethanol. Organic solvents were eliminated by passing samples through C-18 (containing 500 mg sorbent) solid phase extraction (SPE) cartridges (Supelco Analytical, PA, USA) coated with octadecyl silica as the packing material. Samples were eluted from the columns in 5mL ethyl acetate (Sigma-Aldrich Co., MO, USA) containing 1% methanol and evaporated to dryness under a stream of nitrogen gas. Samples were then re-suspended in 500L of commercial 1 enzyme immunoassay (EIA) buffer (Cayman Chemicals Company, MI, USA). Resulting PGE2 and the intermediary metabolites were derivatized overnight at 37°C to bicyclo-PGE2 in 150 L of 1 M carbonate buffer and thereafter 200 L of 1M phosphate buffer and 150 L of 1 EIA buffer added (Cayman Chemicals Company, MI, USA). Bicyclo-PGE2 levels were then determined by quantitative sandwich EIA as described by the manufacturer (Cayman Chemicals Company, MI, USA). Sensitivity of detection for bicyclo-PGE2 levels was ¥2 pg/mL.
Plasma and urine creatinine levels were determined using the creatinine determination kit (Cayman Chemicals Company, MI, USA). Plasma and urine samples were diluted 1:20 with ultra-pure water and creatinine was quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) according to the manufacturers protocol (Cayman Chemicals Company, MI, USA).
Total RNA was isolated from cryo-preserved white blood cell pellets (preserved in commercial RNAlater RNA stabilization reagent [Qiagen, CA, USA]) by the acid guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction method. Resulting RNA concentrations were determined by measuring absorbance (A260nm/A280nm) and the quality assessed by checking for contaminating salts and proteins at A230nm/A320nm, using a GeneQuant pro spectrophotometer (Biochrom Ltd. Cambridge, England).
Reverse transcription of RNA to complementary DNA (cDNA) was performed using the high capacity cDNA reverse transcription kit (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA) according to the manufacturers protocol. Briefly, 2 g of total RNA was reverse transcribed in a 20 L reaction mix, containing as final concentrations, 1 reverse transcription (RT) buffer, 1mM dNTP mix, 1 RT random hexamers, 5 units MultiScribe„¢ reverse transcriptase and 20 units RNase inhibitor. Reverse transcription steps were performed using a GeneAmp PCR system 9700 (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA), with the thermal cycler conditions set at an initial 65°C, hold for 5 minutes, followed by a 25°C hold for 10 minutes, 48°C hold for 45 minutes, and a final enzyme denaturing step at 95°C for 5 minutes.
To quantify COX-2 mRNA expression, the resulting complementary DNA (cDNA) was amplified for 30 cycles using oligonucleotides spanning the exon-intron junction in the COX-2 gene, with the sense (5-GAC TCC CTT GGG TGT CAA AGG TAA-3) and antisense (5-GTG AAG TGC TGG GCA AAG AAT G-3) sequence used to generate a 138 bp product. The glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) gene (endogenous control) was amplified to yield a 381 bp fragment in a 30 cycle reaction using the following oligo sequences; sense (5-CTA CTG GCG CTG CCA AGG CTG T-3) and antisense (5-GCC ATG AGG TCC ACC ACC CTG T-3). Resulting polymerase chain reaction (PCR) fragments were resolved on a 2% agarose gel stained with 0.5 mg/mL ethidium bromide (Sigma Chemicals Co. MO, USA) and visualized under UV light (Sprectroline Corporation, NY, USA). Electrophoretic gel films were analyzed using the ImageJ software and PCR product mean band intensities quantified. The COX-2 mRNA expression mean values (arbitrary units; AU) were normalized by expressing them relative to GAPDH mRNA mean values.
Pigment containing monocyte (PCM) levels were determined in thin Giemsa-stained blood smears, with a total of 30 monocytes examined per slide, and the number of PCM expressed as a percentage of the total number of cells examined. Total PCM/L was calculated according to previous methods. PCM levels were grouped as follows; PCM () = no pigment-containing monocytes; Low = 10%; Moderate = >10 and <26.7%; and High = ¥26.7%. The RPI was similarly determined according to our previous methods. To approximate the rates of erythrophagocytosis among the clinical groups, methanol-fixed Giemsa stained thin blood smears were used, where 100 monocytes/macrophages were counted per slide, and the number of monocytes/macrophages with phagocytosed RBCs expressed as a percentage of the total number of cells examined. In addition, erythrophagocytosis/L was estimated using the coulter analyzer generated total monocyte counts.
Analyses were performed with SPSS statistical software package version 19 (IBM IL, USA). Comparisons of demographic, clinical, and parasitological variables between the groups were computed using Pearsons Chi-square (Ï2) and Mann-Whitney U tests. Relationships between plasma or urinary bicyclo-PGE2/creatinine levels and Hb concentrations were determined using Spearmans correlation co-efficient. The relationship between plasma and urinary bicyclo-PGE2/creatinine levels and malaria clinical groups (and PCM levels) was examined using Mann-Whitney U tests for pair-wise comparisons and Kruskal-Wallis tests for across group comparisons, respectively. COX-2 mRNA expression data were normalized by expressing COX-2 as a ratio over GAPDH (endogenous control) with comparisons between the non-SMA and SMA groups performed using Students t-test. Comparison of COX-2/GAPDH across the various PCM groups was performed by ANOVA. Statistical significance was set at P  0.050.