Ten healthy volunteers, aged 31 to 41 years, (BMI: 25.7  1.2), participated in our study. The study was approved by the Hospital Ethics Committee in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and all volunteers gave written informed consent. All subjects had no history of recent infection, myocardial infection, or CAD, and were taking no medication. Body Mass Index (BMI) was calculated as the ratio of weight (Kg) per height in the square (m2). Insulin resistance was calculated by the homeostasis model assessment index (HOMA-IR) as (fasting insulin (IU/L)  fasting glucose (mmol/L))/22.5. Fasting glucose (YSI 2300 STAT Plus Glucose & Lactate Analyser, YSI Incorporated, Ohaio, USA), insulin levels (INSI-CTK irma, DiaSorin, Saluggia, Italy), and free fatty acid (FFA) levels (Falcor 300 Chemical Analyser, Menarini Diagnostics, Italy) were measured in the plasma from all individuals. High sensitivity C-reactive protein (CRP) was measured using the BN Prospec Nephelometer (Dade Behring, Newark, DE, USA) according to manufacturer's instructions. 
Peripheral blood was obtained from all subjects after an overnight fast and the mononuclear cells were separated from heparinized blood samples immediately after collection, using a Ficoll-Paque (Amersham, GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB, Uppsala, Sweden) gradient, while the plasma from the same samples was separated, aliquoted, immediately frozen, and kept at 80°C until assayed.
The isolated mononuclear cells were left selectively to adhere into a 100mm-petri dish for 1 hour for the isolation of the primary monocyte-derived macrophages, as it has been described previously. The adhered monocyte-enriched mononuclear cells were collected, counted, and plated at a density of 0.8  106 cells/well in 24-well plates in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum, 2mM L-glutamine, and penicillin/streptomycin under an atmosphere of 5% CO2 at 37°C. Cells were left to incubate with either of the following agents: 138.9nM insulin (Humulin Regular, Lilly France, Fegersheim, France), 100ng/mL human leptin (R&D Systems, Oxon, UK), 33mM glucose (GIBCOBRL, Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad, USA), 107M dexamethasone (G. A. Pharmaceuticals, Athens, Greece), or combination of the former three agents for 24hrs. After the incubation period, the medium was collected for measurement of the resistin, TNF-, IL-6, and IL-1 secreted proteins, while at the same time total RNA was extracted from the cell pellet. Cell viability and cell counting were done using the trypan blue exclusion.
 Total RNA was isolated from the human peripheral monocyte-enriched mononuclear cells using the Trizol Reagent (Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad, USA). The integrity of RNA samples was determined on agarose gels (1.2%) and spectrophotometrically, using the absorption ratio at 260/280nm. Before the reverse transcription reaction, removal of any residual DNA contamination was done by incubating all RNA samples with RQ1-RNase free DNase I (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), at 37°C for 25 minutes, as suggested by the manufacturer.
cDNA synthesis was performed in all samples, using oligo random hexanucleotides and M-MLV (Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus) reverse transcriptase (Promega Corp. Madison, USA), as previously described. The reaction volume was precipitated with NaAcetate and ethanol at 20°C overnight. The cDNAs were diluted in nanopure water and were kept as a stock at 80°C, before the real-time PCR analysis. 
A relative quantitative real-time PCR was performed in a spectrofluorometric thermal cycler (LightCycler, ROCHE, Manheim, Germany) using the LightCycler Fast Start DNA Master HybProbe kit (ROCHE, Manheim, Germany), primers and fluorescently labeled hybridization probes specifically designed by TIM-MOLBIOL (Berlin, Germany) to detect the genes of interest. The specific reaction conditions for each set of genes (primer concentration, annealing temperature, magnesium chloride) were optimized first using the SYBR Green fluorescent dye (LightCycler FastStart DNA Master SYBR Green I, Roche Diagnostics). Hybridization primers and probes for all target and reference genes were as shown in Tables 3 and 4.
Relative quantification RT-PCR is the method that determines the changes in steady-state mRNA levels of a gene across various samples and expresses them relative to the levels of an internal reference control gene, usually a housekeeping gene. In order to quantify resistin, TNF-, IL-6, and IL-1 relative mRNA levels, we used the calibrator normalized assay with an efficiency correction and the LightCycler Relative Quantification 1.01 Software (Roche Diagnostics) as it has been described before. Briefly, using this quantification method, results are expressed as the target/reference ratio of the sample divided by the target/reference ration of the calibrator, and it does not require a standard curve in each run. The human housekeeping genes of -actin and porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD) were used as standards for normalization. Selection of either -actin or PBGD as housekeeping genes was necessary, because the copy number of the housekeeping gene should be in a similar range with that of the target gene to make comparative quantification possible. The RNA-DNase I treated samples, in which no M-MLV (Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus) reverse transcriptase was added, together with the water containing samples (no DNA template), were used as negative controls in the RT-PCR reaction.
Relative quantification results were expressed in arbitrary units (AUs). Results from some PCR runs were run in ethidium bromide stained agarose gels and photographed in an Image Analyser VDS System (Amersham Biotech-Pharmacia, Sweden) for visualization purposes.
Resistin (BioVendor, Czech Republic), TNF-, IL-6, and IL-1 (Quantikine, R&D Systems, Oxon, UK) secreted proteins were measured in the supernatant from the human cultured monocyte-enriched mononuclear cells, by the use of standard commercial ELISAs according to the manufacturer recommended protocols. Circulating resistin (BioVendor, Czech Republic), TNF- (R&D Systems, Oxon, UK), adiponectin, IL-6, and IL-1 proteins (Human Serum Adipokine Panel A and Panel B LINCOplex kits, Linco-Millipore Corp., USA) were measured in the plasma of all volunteers using either standard commercial sandwich ELISA kits or the multiplex assay (xMAP technology) and the fluorescently labeled microsphere beads in a LUMINEX 200 instrument (Luminex Corp., USA). Due to the low circulating IL-6 and IL-1 protein levels in the human plasma, we could not detect IL-1 in the plasma of the healthy individuals, while IL-6 could be detected in only 4 out of 10 individuals making the analysis of circulating IL-1 and IL-6 problematic. 
The sensitivities of the assays were: 0.2ng/mL (resistin), <4.4pg/mL (TNF--Elisa assay), <0.70pg/mL (IL-6-Elisa assay), <1pg/mL (IL-1-Elisa assay), 0.1pg/mL (IL-1-multiplex assay), 145.4pg/mL (adiponectin), and 1.6pg/mL (IL-6-multiplex assay). The intra-and interassay coefficients of variation were, respectively, 3.6% and 6.7% (resistin), 4.9% and 5.8% (TNF--Elisa assay), 2.6% and 4.5% (IL-6, Elisa assay), 4.8% and 5.6% (IL-1-Elisa assay), 1.47.9% and <21% (adiponectin, IL-6, and IL-1-multiplex assays). Plasma samples were measured in duplicate in a single experiment.
Statistical analysis was performed using the SPSS 14.0.1 software (SPSS Corp, Chicago, IL, USA). Data are expressed as mean  SEM of n independent expreriments. Because the investigated variables showed a nonnormal distribution, nonparametric statistical analyses were applied (Spearmann's correlation test, Wilcoxon signed rank Test). Multivariate regression analysis was also performed if any adjustments were necessary. A P value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. 