Studies and consent procedures were performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki at the VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System (all bronchoscopies and some clinically-indicated lung resections) and the University of Michigan Health System (some clinically-indicated lung resections, including all lung transplants and lung volume reduction surgeries) and were approved by their Institutional Review Boards (FWA 00000348 & FWA 00004969, respectively). All subjects understood the purpose of the study and gave written consent before any research procedures. All subjects underwent a complete history and physical examination by a Pulmonologist, spirometry, chest imaging, prospective collection of medication history, and complete blood count with differential, coagulation studies and chemistry panel.
We recruited 13 healthy never-smoker volunteers and 23 subjects with a smoking history who either were scheduled to undergo bronchoscopy in the evaluation of solitary pulmonary nodules (n=16) or who volunteered (n=7). Among the 23 subjects who had ever smoked, 18 were active smokers (<six months since quitting) and 5 were former smokers (>six months since quitting). Of those with any smoking history, subjects (n =10) with ¥10 pack years, a ratio of forced expiratory volume in 1 second to forced vital capacity (FEV1/FVC) >0.7, normal spirometry, and no clinical diagnosis of COPD represent control smokers. Subjects (n =13) with a smoking history, FEV1/FVC <0.7 and abnormal spirometry were considered to have COPD. All subjects were without evidence of lung infection, interstitial lung disease or collagen vascular disease.
Importantly, not all types of experiments were performed on cells from every subject in this cohort, and conversely, some subjects were used for more than one type of experiment. The characteristics of the BAL subjects used in each type of experiments are summarized in Tables in the Results sections; demographic and clinical data for this entire cohort are shown in Additional file 1: Table S1.
Lung tissue was collected from consented subjects undergoing clinically-indicated resections for pulmonary nodules, lung volume reduction surgery, or lung transplantation (n=25). Using the same definitions as in the BAL cohort, this cohort comprised seven control smokers and 18 subjects with COPD. This cohort was used exclusively for flow cytometric analysis of total lung M¸. Characteristics of this cohort are summarized in the Results section, and demographic and clinical data for individual subjects are shown in Additional file 2: Table S2.
BAL was performed in the right middle lobe and lingula of the volunteers and in whichever of these sites was contralateral to the nodule in the clinically-indicated bronchoscopies, in which the research BAL was performed as early as feasible, and always before any biopsies or brushings. We instilled 100 ml normal saline per site, using a 30 ml syringe and gentle manual suction. BAL fluid was filtered through sterile gauze to remove mucous, and cells were washed thrice with PBS, with centrifugation between washes.
BAL cells (>95% AM¸ by Wright-Giemsa-stained cytospins) were either immediately processed for flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry or were cultured briefly to purify AM¸ by adherence. For this purpose, cells were resuspended in complete medium (RPMI 1640 containing 25 mM HEPES, 2 mM l-glutamine, 1 mM pyruvate, 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin, 10% heat-inactivated AB human serum (all from Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), and 55 M 2-ME (Sigma Chemical, St. Louis, MO), and were plated at 2  105 cells/well in sterile 24-well plates. Cells were incubated for 1.5 h in 5% CO2 at 37°C, washed to remove nonadherent cells, then incubated in AIM-V serum-free medium (Invitrogen) under experimental conditions. For TLR3 stimulation, adherence-purified AM¸ were cultured in AIM-V alone or with poly(I:C) at 50 g/ml for 24 h.
Lung tissue was dissected free of any areas containing nodules, cancers or evidence of infection by a Pathologist before being released to the study. Lung sections weighing approximately 3 g were dispersed using a Waring blender in a biosafety cabinet without enzyme treatments, which we have previously shown produces single cell suspensions of high viability and functional capacity. Cells were filtered through a 40 m strainer to remove debris and were resuspended in staining buffer (2% FBS in PBS) for flow cytometery.
THP-1 cells obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA) were grown according to the suppliers guidelines. Cells were plated at 4  105 cells/well in 24-well plates, and after adherence, were differentiated by exposure to 150 ng/ml phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) and 0.01 M vitamin D3 for 48 hrs, and then were washed with fresh complete medium before exposure to various concentrations of cigarette smoke-extract (CSE) for 4 hr. Fresh CSE was prepared by bubbling the mainstream smoke of two University of Kentucky Tobacco Health Research Institute standardized cigarettes (lot 2R4F), using a Jaeger-Baumgartner Cigarette Smoking Machine (C.H. Technologies, New Jersey) driven by dry compressed air, into 20 ml RPMI 1640; the result was defined as 10% CSE. CSE was filter-sterilized using a 0.22 m membrane and was used the same day.
RNA was isolated using RiboPure kits (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), TURBO DNA-free (Applied Biosystems) to remove genomic DNA, and Retroscript kits (Applied Biosystems) for reverse-transcription. We performed quantitative real-time PCR using the Stratagene Mx3000P (LaJolla, CA), with human glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) as the endogenous reference, and commercial primer-probe sets (Taqman chemistry, Applied Biosystems). Transcript levels were reported relative to a calibrator of unstimulated THP cells, or AM¸ from never smokers, as appropriate, as calculated on the thermocycler.
BAL cells were resuspended in 100 L staining buffer {1% FA Buffer (BD Bioscience, San Jose, CA), 1% FCS, 0.01% sodium azide} per tube. We used antibodies against the following antigens (clones in parentheses): CD45 (2D1) (eBioscience, San Diego, CA), TLR3 (40C1285.6), TLR7 (polyclonal), TLR9 (26C593.2) (Imgenex Corp., San Diego, CA), and TLR8 (303F1.14) (Dendritics, Lyon, France). To detect intracellular receptor expression, cells were treated with Fixation and Permeabilization Buffers (eBioscience). In all experiments, we used isotype-matched controls, analyzed cells on an LSR II flow cytometer (BD Bioscience), and collected a minimum of 10,000 CD45+ events per sample, using FACS Diva software with automatic compensation, and FlowJo analysis software (Tree Star, Inc., Ashland, OR). Details of instrument setup have been described recently.
Cytospins were immersed in cold acetone followed by methanol plus hydrogen peroxide. The slides were stained with biotinylated anti-human TLR3 (Imgenex) or isotype control antibodies, followed by Universal ABC peroxidase complex and 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole peroxidase substrate. Slides were counter-stained with hematoxylin and photographed using an Olympus BX51 digital camera.
CXCL10 levels were determined using Biosource Multiplex Assays (Invitrogen) and a Luminex 200„¢ (Luminex Corporation, Austin, TX).
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad, La Jolla, CA) except as specified. We used the nonparametric unpaired MannWhitney test to determine differences between two groups (smokers versus never-smokers; healthy subjects versus COPD subjects) in mRNA and flow cytometry data; the nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA to compare multiple conditions on THP cells in vitro; and ANOVA with Bonferronis Multiple Comparison post-hoc testing to determine differences between smokers and never-smokers in stimulated cytokine secretion. We used Spearman non-parametric analysis to correlate TLR3 mRNA and protein expression with clinical variables and performed linear regression using SPSS (IBM Corp.; Armonk, NY). A two-tailed p value of<0.05 was considered significant.