The study population consisted of 156 consecutive patients (106 men and 50 women) scheduled for surgery from 1 January 2002 to 31 December 2006 at Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China. All patients enrolled in this study had a histologically confirmed diagnosis of primary gastric carcinoma that was further analyzed pathologically after surgery. Surgery consisted of subtotal or total gastrectomy in all patients; a standardized technique was used for surgical resection and lymphadenectomy, as described elsewhere. Patients who underwent non-resective surgery, and those with Siewert type I cardia adenocarcinoma were excluded from the study. Specimen and tumor sizes were recorded by the pathologists. Representative areas of the tumor were selected and snap-frozen. pTNM classification followed the criteria of the 6th edition of the UICC.The median age of the patients was 57.2 yrs (range: 2778 yrs)Age, sex, type of surgery, tumor location, TNM stage, chemotherapy, specimen length, tumor size, and histological differentiation, were recorded for each patient in a database. All the patients who underwent any type of chemotherapy were on the 5-FU, platinum or taxol-based regimens. All patients, after discharge from the hospital, entered a follow-up program according to standard protocol. The follow-up was closed in April 2010. The study was approved by the ethics committee in Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, all participants provided their written informed consent to participate in this study.
Gastric carcinoma cell lines, AGS, MKN-45, HGC-27, MGC-803 BGC-823 and SGC-7901 were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA), Japanese Cancer Research Resources Bank (Tokyo, Japan) and Beijing Medical University (Beijing, China). Cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (Sigma), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Invitrogen). A mouse monoclonal antibody to CDH17 (ab54511) was from Abcam (Cambridge, MA).
The pLKO.1 puro (7 kb) lentiviral construct contains a U6 promoter and HIV-1 RNA packaging signal with pruomycin- and ampicillin- resistance elements cloned 3 of the human phosphoglycerate kinase (hPGK) promoter. A cpptCTE was inserted 5 of the hPGK promoter. Human CDH17 shRNA constructs were generated by ligating the following annealed oligomers into the unique Agel and EcoRI sites of pLKO.1 puro: CDH17 shRNA forward (5- CCG GCC ACT TTC ATA TCC GCT GGA ACT CGA GTT CCA GCG GAT ATG AAA GTG GTT TTT G -3) and reverse (5- AAT TCA AAA ACC ACT TTC ATA TCC GCT GGA ACT CGA GTT CCA GCG GAT ATG AAA GTG G -3). Lentiviral preparations were produced by co-transfecting pLKO.1 puro empty vector with CDH17 shRNA, and helper virus packaging plasmids pCMVR8.9 and pMG.G (at a 10101 ratio) into 293T cells. Transfection was performed using lipofectamine and PLUS reagent (Invitrogen). Lentiviruses were harvested at 24, 36, 48 and 60 h after transfection. Two controls were set up, in which the gastric cancer cells either received no treatment, or were transfected with scrambled non-targeted RNAi vector (Mock). Infection was carried out in the presence of 8 µg/ml of polybrene. Following infection, AGS and MKN-45 cells were selected for stable expression of the shRNAs using 2 µg/mL puromycin. Cells were lysed for western blot analysis 10 days post-infection.
Protein lysates were prepared from cell line monolayers using lysis buffer (1% NP-40,50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 100 mM sodium fluoride, 30 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 2 mM sodium molybdate, 5 mM EDTA, 2 mM sodium orthovanadate) containing protease inhibitors (10 mg/ml aprotinin, 10 mg/ml leupeptin, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride). Protein concentrations were determined using the Bio-Rad protein assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories Hercules, CA, USA). Cell lysates were subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfacte-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), and the separated proteins were electrophoretically transferred to immobilon-P membranes (Millipore). After blocking by non-fat milk, the membranes were incubated independently in primary antibodies P53 (Cell Signaling #9282), MDM2 (Zymed #33-7100), P21 (Zymed #33-7000), Cyclin D1 (Santa Cruz sc-753), Rb (Cell Signaling #9309), -Catenin (Zymed, 13-8400), GSK3 (Santa Cruz, sz-7291) and p-GSK3 (Ser9) (Cell Signaling #9336). The membrane was washed several times in PBS with 0.1% Tween20 and scanned in the LI-COR Odyssey infrared two-color detection imager system (LI-COR Bioscience) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Subcellular fractionations were performed using specific cell lysis buffers and repeated centrifugation steps (Nuclear extract kit from Active Motive, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer's specifications. Cell fractions were dissolved in RIPA buffer, and the protein concentration was measured using BCA protein quantification assay. Protein extracts (20 µg) were further dissolved in 1 Laemmli buffer, subjected to electrophoresis on a 10% SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes as described above. Western blot analysis of poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP, from Cell Signaling Technology Inc, Beverly, MA) and superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2, from ABFrontier, Seoul, Korea) were performed to confirm appropriate separation of nuclear and cytosolic proteins.
Total RNA was extracted from cell lines and frozen gastric adenocarcinoma tissues by the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen). Reverse transcription of total RNA (2 Ag) was done using an Advantage RT for PCR kit (Clontech), and cDNA was subjected to PCR for 28 cycles of amplification with the following primers: CDH17 Fw, 5-ACAATCGACCCACGTTTCTC and CHD17 Rv, 5-ATATTGTGCACCGGGATCAT. -Actin was used as a control.
A total of 156 formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded gastric cancer tissue specimens were selected for IHC study. IHC staining was performed on 5-µm tissue sections rehydrated through graded alcohols. Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 0.3% hydrogen peroxide for 15 min. Slides were microwave treated in 10 mM citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for 10 min. Nonspecific binding was blocked with 10% normal rabbit serum for 20 min. The tissue slides were incubated with anti-CDH17 (150 dilution) for 60 min at 37°C in a moist chamber. The slides were incubated with biotinylated rabbit anti-mouse immunoglobulin at a concentration of 1100 for 30 min at 37°C then reacted with a streptavidinperoxidase conjugate for 30 min at 37°C and finally incubated with 3-3 diaminobenzidine as a chromogen substrate. To exclude a false positive signal, negative controls were included in every test by replacing the primary antibody with blocking serum. Two independent observers blinded to the clinicopathologic information scored the slides. The definition of staining was as follows: negative, with 0% to less than 5% of tumor cells showing immunoreactivity; weak, 540% of tumor cells showing immunoreactivity; positive, more than 40% of tumor cells showing immunoreactivity. The positive cases were futher sub-classified into CDH17+ (immunoreactivity: 4060%), CDH17 2+ (immunoreactivity: 6080%) and CDH17 3+ (immunoreactivity: 80100%).
The experimental procedures for cell growth, foci formation, soft agar, cell migration, wound healing and cell cycle assays are described in the Supporting Methods S1.
The rescue of CDH17 in shCDH17 AGS and MKN-45 cell lines are described in the Supporting Methods S1.
This study was carried out in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. The protocol was approved by the Committee on the Ethics of Animal Experiments of Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center(Permit Number:09-0238). All surgery was performed under sodium pentobarbital anesthesia, and all efforts were made to minimize suffering. After anesthesia, Nude mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation.
In vivo tumorigenesis was investigated by tumor xenograft experiments. About 2106 AGS cells infected with CDH17 shRNA, control AGS cells infected with mock RNAi vector and parental AGS cells were injected s.c. into the right and left hind legs of 4-week-old nude mice (30 mice, 10 per condition). Tumor formation in nude mice was monitored over an 8-week period. The tumor volume was calculated by the formula VŠ=Š0.5LW2.  
Subcutaneous tumors were induced in nude mice using AGS cells as above mentioned. One week after inoculation, the mice were treated with anti-CDH17 shRNA. Each mouse received 100 µL of intratumoral injectionscontaining 1109 copies of CDH17 or mock lentivirus, twice weekly for 2 weeks. Five mice were used in each group. Tumor growth were monitored daily.
Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 13.0. Differences among variables were assessed by Ï2 analysis or 2-tailed Student's t tests. Data are presented as the mean  SD unless otherwise indicated. Overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) curves were calculated by the Kaplan-Meier method, and the differences between the two groups were compared by log-rank test. A p value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.