Healthy adult volunteers (NL) over the age of 60 years were recruited from the New York City urban community (n = 67). Exclusion criteria were major medical conditions including diabetes, cardiovascular or kidney disease, and cancer. Information was collected on medical history, medications and dietary caloric and AGE intake.
All participants consented to participate in the studies and the study protocol was approved by the Mount Sinai School of Medicine Institutional Review Board.
A group of 18 healthy participants over the age of 60, whose usual diet was rich in AGEs (dietary AGE intake >15 AGE Eq/day), were randomized to either a low-AGE diet (n = 10) or their usual diet (n = 8) for a period of 4 months. Gender ratio (6/2 F/M vs. 7/3 F/M), age (63.5  5 vs. 65  2 years) and BMI (29  2 vs. 26  3) were not significantly different between the low-AGE diet vs. the usual AGE diet, respectively. Fasting blood samples and 3-day food records were obtained at the beginning and at the end of the intervention. Participants prepared their own food at home after being individually instructed on how to reduce dietary AGE intake by modifying the cooking method (time and temperature) without changing the quantity of food. Specifically, they were instructed to use moist heat methods such as boil, poach, stew or steam, and to avoid dry heat methods such as frying, baking, roasting or grilling. We previously found that switching to these suggested methods of cooking limits new AGE formation, particularly in animal food products.
This clinical trial was registered in www.clinicaltrials.gov under number NCT00579774.
After an evaluation of medical history and a physical examination, participants provided a fasting blood sample at baseline and 4 months later. Routine blood tests were performed in the hospital clinical laboratory.
Daily dietary AGE content from 3-day food records that emphasized cooking methods was estimated from a database of ~560 foods which listed AGE values expressed as AGE Equivalents (Eq/day) (1 AGE equivalent = 1000 kilounits). The 3-day food record estimates the amount of food and beverages consumed based on established guidelines developed to assist in estimating portions. A dietitian reviewed the record with the subject, probing for additional details on portions and preparation methods, to enhance accuracy and completeness. In addition, all subjects were administered a 15 min food frequency questionnaire on dietary habits and methods of food preparation, as described. The information obtained evaluates the frequency at which certain foods were consumed (meat, fish, poultry, cheese, egg yolk, fats, fast foods, and convenience breakfast and snack foods), the portion sizes (in household measures), and methods of cooking (boiled, roasted, broiling/grilling, frying, or canned). Each item was assigned a numerical value, multiplied by the number of entries; the sum of entries per day provided an AGE score. Additional estimates on intakes (based on a 24-h recall record) were obtained from subjects by twice weekly phone calls intended to verify and/or emphasize the subjects compliance. The data from the 3-day records significantly correlated with the 24-h recall data, as well as with the previously described 7-day AGE-food frequency test, obtained at baseline and end of study.
Nutrient calculations were estimated from food records using a nutrient software program (Food Processor version 10.1; ESHA Research, Salem, Oregon).
µN-carboxymethyl-lysine (CML) and methylglyoxal derivatives (MG) in serum were quantified by ELISAs, using two non-cross-reactive monoclonal antibodies (4G9 and MG3D11 mabs) raised against synthetic standards, CML-BSA and MG-BSA, respectively. In our laboratory, the test sensitivity for CML and MG derivatives is 0.1 u/ml and 0.004 nmol/ml, respectively; the intra-assay variation is 2.6 % (for CML) and 2.8 % (for MG) and the inter-assay variation is 4.1 % (CML) and 5.2 % (MG). Insulin was measured by an ELISA kit (ALPCO Diagnostics, Salem, NH). IR was estimated according to the Homeostasis Model Assessment (HOMA) index as: FI x Fasting glucose/22.5, where FI is insulin in U/mL and fasting glucose is expressed in mmol/L. Leptin and adiponectin were determined with human leptin or adiponectin ELISA kits (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). TNF was measured in PMNC lysates by an ELISA kit (Biosource International, Camarillo, CA, USA).
MNCs were separated from fasting, EDTA anti-coagulated blood by Ficoll-Hypaque Plus gradient (American Biosciences, Uppsala, Sweden) and used to isolate mRNA and protein. Total RNA was extracted by Trizol (Molecular Probes, Inc.). The extracted RNA had an A260/280 ratio between 1.8 and 2.0. Total RNA was reverse-transcribed using Superscript III RT (Invitrogen).
AGER1, RAGE, and SIRT1 mRNA expression was analyzed by quantitative SYBR Green real-time PCR. Amplification was performed with 40 cycles of denaturation at 95 °C for 15 s, annealing at 55 °C for 20 s and elongation at 72 °C for 30 s. Primer sequences were: for AGER1, forward primer 5-CTGGGGCTCTTCATCTT CAG-3, reverse primer 5-GTTGCATCTCCCACA GAGGT-3, for RAGE, forward primer 5-AGGAGCGT GCAGAACTGAAT-3, reverse primer 5-TTGGCAA GGTGGGGTTATAC-3, and for SIRT1, forward primer 5-CGGAAACAATACCTCCACCT-3, reverse primer 5-CACCCCAGCTCCAGTTAGAA. During thermal cycling, emission from each sample was recorded and the raw fluorescence data was processed using SDS software to produce threshold cycle (Ct) values for each sample. -actin and GAPDH housekeeping genes were used for internal normalization. The transcript copy number of target genes was determined based on their Ct values.
Cell lysates were prepared by sonication in 500 l lysis buffer (New England Biolabs) and cell proteins were separated on 8 % SDS-PAGE gels and transferred onto nitrocellulose (NT) membranes for probing with primary and secondary antibodies for SIRT1 (Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA, USA), PPAR and AGER1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and secondary antibodies and then visualized by an enhanced chemiluminescence system (Roche).
Synthetic preparations of MG-BSA (containing 22 MG-Arg/mol), by GCMS and, together with BSA (Fraction V, Sigma), were rendered LPS-free prior to use (using a Detoxigel column, Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). The pass-through tested negative for Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), (Limulus assay, Bio Whittaker, Walkerville, MD, USA), and contained MG-BSA: 0.12 nmol MG/g and BSA: 0.00001 nmol MG/g.
Data analyses were performed using SPSS 17.0 software (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). Data in the tables and figures are presented as mean  SEM. The KolmogorovSmirnov goodness-of-fit test was used to test for normal distribution. Variables not normally distributed were logarithmically converted for analyses. Differences of means between groups were analyzed by the Student t test or ANOVA, followed by the Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons, depending on the number of groups. Correlation analyses were also examined by the Pearson correlation coefficient.
Significance of changes during the interventional study was assessed by comparing deltas (differences) between end of study and baseline values for both the AGE-restricted and the regular AGE diet groups by unpaired t test. Significant differences were defined as a value of p < 0.05 and are based on two-sided tests.