Eligible patients were ¥18 years old, previously treated with local therapy (e.g. radiation or surgery) for histologically proven prostatic adenocarcinoma and subsequently developed biochemically recurrent disease (confirmed rising PSA of ¥1 ng/mL at least 2 weeks apart). Biochemically recurrent patients were the focus given that this population would be less likely to experience serious morbidity as a result of disease progression should disulfiram lack an anti-prostate cancer effect. Subjects were required to have adequate bone marrow, renal, and liver function and no evidence of metastasis. All previous local therapies must have been discontinued at least four weeks prior to enrollment. Patients were allowed to have received prior systemic therapies. Those treated with hormonal therapy were allowed to enroll if their treatment was discontinued >6 months prior and had testosterone recovery. Patients were also required to have an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 2. Participants had to agree not to drink alcohol during the study and for 14 days after its completion. Participants signed an Institutional Review Board-approved consent form.
This was an open-label, prospective, multicenter, clinical trial evaluating disulfiram in men with biochemically recurrent PCa. Two cohorts were planned with doses selected based on the FDA approved doses for disulfiram. A dose escalation occurred based on whether a demethylating effect (i.e. ¥10% decrease in global 5meC content from PBMC) was observed at the initial dose. Cohorts 1 and 2 received disulfiram 250 mg and 500 mg daily respectively. If a demethylating response was observed in <3 out of the nine subjects initially enrolled to cohort 1, then cohort 2 was opened. If there was evidence for a demethylating response in ¥3 subjects in cohort 1 or 2, then that cohort would expand to treat 17 total patients (figure 1). Toxicity of disulfiram was also taken into account, with dose escalation or cohort expansion only occurring if grade 34 adverse events (AEs) were observed in <3 subjects out of the first 9 patients enrolled to cohort 1 or 2. Toxicity was defined using the National Cancer Institute (NCI) guidelines in the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events Version 3.0.
Blood samples were drawn serially at the time of screening, on day 1/cycle 1 and weeks 4, 8, 16 and 24. Samples were stored at 4°C or on ice prior to PBMC DNA extraction. Samples not drawn at the primary site (i.e. Johns Hopkins) were shipped overnight to the primary site for processing. DNA samples were batched and stored at 70°C. Global DNA methylation status was determined on PBMC DNA using a High Pressure Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (HPLC/MS) assay as described previously. The overall 5meC content (as percentage of total 2-deoxycytidine content) in genomic DNA was compared before and after treatment. Given slight variations in the assay between batches, all batches were normalized to the same mean.
Disulfiram plasma concentrations were not measured due to stability issues. Plasma samples were obtained at baseline and prior to disulfiram administration [minimum concentration (Cmin)] at week 4 to measure the metabolite, S-Methyl N,N-diethyldithiocarbamate (MeDDC). Briefly, 0.1ml plasma was extracted with acetonitrile precipitation. MeDDC separated on a Waters X-Terra MS C18 (50  2.1mm, 3.5µm; Milford, MA, USA) column with 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile/2mM ammonium acetate (70:30,v/v) using isocratic flow of 0.2ml/min for 5min. MeDDC was quantitated over the range of 102000ng/mL. Since disulfiram was administered in the evening for multiple patients, the reported Cmin was corrected to the actual/theoretical Cmin at 24 hours utilizing the following formula:  Where k as the elimination rate constant based on a reported T1/2 of 6.3 hour, and t was the difference between the time of the Cmin,reported sample and a 24 hour Cmin. If the Cmin sample was below the lower limit of quantitation (BLQ) or calculated to be BLQ, a concentration of 1/2 the lower limit of quantitation (5ng/mL) was utilized in the calculations and subsequent statistics.
Peripheral blood for determining ceruloplasmin levels were drawn at the same time points as the DNA methylation samples. The ceruloplasmin assay used is a Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments certified lab test. It was performed through participating sites pathology departments.
The primary endpoint of this study was the proportion of patients achieving a demethylation response (¥10% decrease from baseline in total 5meC global gene DNA content as assessed from PBMC) at a given dose level. The average of the screening and day 1/cycle 1 5meC content levels was used as a baseline. Our lab has found that the global 5meC content assay being used is reproducible, with an average percent difference between replicates of 2.2% [95% confidence interval (CI) 0.44%]. Given that the upper bound of the 95% CI for percent difference between replicates was 4%, a ¥10% decrease in 5meC was felt unlikely to occur by chance.
Secondary endpoints included PSA progression at 6 months (confirmed PSA >50% above baseline and ¥2 ng/mL above nadir), changes in PSA kinetics, safety, pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) correlates, and ceruloplasmin changes.
Adverse events were assessed by the lead site on an ongoing basis, with quarterly reviews of the clinical data at a minimum. Severe AEs were reviewed as they were reported. These were assessed by the medical monitor and their decision regarding the safety of continuing the study was shared with the investigators. The study could be terminated based on the assessment of either the lead site, study sponsor, or the principal investigator.
The dose escalation scheme was designed using a Simon two-stage approach (figure 1). A study cohort of 17 would have yielded 95% power to detect a 60% demethylating response rate compared to a null rate of 20%, with a one-sided alpha error of 0.05. The probability of stopping the trial with only nine patients in either cohort was 2.5% assuming that the true response rate was 60%. The probability of stopping the trial if the true demethylating response rate was 20% in either cohort was 73.8%.