Nicotine, atropine, and -bungarotoxin were purchased from Sigma. The nAChR antagonist methyllycaconitine was obtained from Tocris Biosciences (Ellisville, MO).
GATA16 polyclonal antibodies and Sp1 monoclonal antibody were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). The secondary donkey-anti-rabbit and rabbit-anti-mouse antibodies were obtained from Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL. Polyclonal GAPDH antibody was obtained from Trevigen, Inc. (Gaithersburg, MD). The bovine 7-nAChR-promoter-Luciferase construct was a kind gift from Dr. M. Criado, Instituto de Neurociencias de Alicante, Universidad Miguel Hern¡ndez-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient­ficas, Alicante, Spain.
The human SCC-L cell lines NCI-H520, NCI-H226, and SK-MES-1 (hereinafter referred to as H520, H226, and SK-MES) were purchased from the ATCC (Manassas, VA). H520 and H226 were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (Mediatech Inc., Manassas, VA) supplemented with 2 mm glutamine, 10 mm HEPES, 1 mm sodium pyruvate, 4.5 g/liter glucose, 1.5 g/liter sodium bicarbonate, 100 units/ml penicillin, 50 g/ml streptomycin, and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). SK-MES was grown in minimum essential medium with Earle's salts (EMEM) containing non-essential amino acids, 1 mm sodium pyruvate, 100 units/ml penicillin, 50 g/ml streptomycin, and 10% FBS. These cell lines were authenticated by the ATCC Cell Authentication service using Short Tandem Repeat (STR) profiling techniques (data not shown).
Fresh-frozen human SCC-L tissues (n = 6) from patients who were active smokers were obtained from the Biospecimen Core Program, Markey Cancer Center, Lexington, University of Kentucky. The use of all SCC-L tumor tissues was approved by the Markey Biospecimen Utilization committee, Markey Cancer Center, Lexington, University of Kentucky. The smoking history of the patients is described in Fig. 1E.
Lysates for each cell line were made using the Nonidet P-40-based lysis protocol. Cells were lysed with M2 lysis buffer as described previously. The relative expression of the indicated proteins was analyzed by Western blotting using standard protocols. The results of the Western blotting assays were quantitated by ImageJ 1.46p (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD).
Cell lysates were prepared from frozen human SCC-L tumor tissues as described elsewhere. The tissues were incubated with 1 ml of ice-cold red blood cell lysis buffer (0.14 m NH4Cl and 0.017 m Tris-HCl, pH 7.2) on ice for 5 min. The cells were washed three times in red blood cell lysis buffer until red blood cells were no longer visible. The cell pellet was resuspended in one packed cell volume of M2 lysis buffer. The rest of the protocol was the same as described for preparing lysates from cultured cells.
The expression of 7-nAChR and 3-nAChR subunits in human SCC-L cell lines was analyzed by using ELISA kits (Antibodies Online Inc., Atlanta, GA). Each of these assays was completed in duplicate, and the whole experiment was performed two independent times for each cell line.
H520 human SCC-Ls were plated in 8-well chamber slides at a density of 104 cells/well. After overnight incubation at 37 °C, the medium of the cells was changed to RPMI containing 2.5% FBS in the presence or absence of 100 nm nicotine. This was designated as day 0. On days 2, 4, and 6, the old medium was aspirated, and new medium containing 100 nm nicotine was added. The rate of BrdU incorporation was measured using a BrdU Labeling and Detection Kit II (Roche Applied Science) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The number of positive cells on day 0 was assumed to be 1. Increases in the number of cells in BrdU-labeled cells (as a result of nicotine treatment) were calculated as a -fold increase of the number of BrdU-positive cells on day 0. Each sample was tested in duplicate, and the BrdU assay was performed two independent times.
H520 cells (3.0  106) were suspended in a 1:1 (v/v) solution of serum-free medium and Matrigel (BD Biosciences). This cell suspension was treated with 100 nm nicotine at 4 °C for 30 min and subsequently applied to the 9-day-old chicken embryo CAM as described previously. The chicken embryos were incubated for 7 days. After incubation, the H520 tumor implants were removed and weighed. A total of seven eggs were assayed for each group. Cell lysates were made from the above H520 tumors grown on CAM using T-Per tissue lysis buffer according to manufacturer's protocol (Thermo Scientific).
H520 and H226 human SCC-L cells were grown to 50% confluence. Subsequently, the medium was aspirated, and the cells were resuspended in RPMI containing 2.5% FBS in the presence or absence of 100 nm nicotine for 72 h at 37 °C. Total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy Plus Mini kit (Qiagen Sciences Inc., Valencia, CA). This kit was also used to isolate total RNA from human SCC-L tumors isolated from patients. The cDNA was synthesized using the iScript cDNA Synthesis kit (Bio-Rad). Data were normalized using 18 S rRNA as the internal control, and the -fold change in the expression levels was determined relative to the untreated cells. The 7-nAChRs primer sequences and PCR conditions are described in Lam et al.. Real-time PCR was performed on a Bio-Rad iCycler (Bio-Rad).
H520 human SCC-Ls were transfected with 2 g of the construct 7-promoter (bovine)-LUC using FuGENE HD transfection reagent (Roche Applied Science) according to manufacturer's protocols. The transfection efficiency was measured by cotransfection with 2 g of pRL construct containing Renilla reniformis luciferase gene (Promega, Madison, WI). The empty vector pGL3-basic (Promega) was used for the mock-transfected cells. Twenty-four hours after transfection the medium was aspirated, and the cells were washed once in 1 PBS. Subsequently, the cells were incubated in RPMI supplemented with 2.5% FBS containing 100 nm nicotine for 48 h. Cell lysates were prepared, and the luciferase activity was measured using a Dual-Glo Luciferase assay kit (Promega). Relative luciferase activity was defined as the mean value of the firefly luciferase/renilla luciferase ratios obtained from two independent experiments.
Chemically synthesized, double-stranded GATA4 siRNA and GATA6 siRNA were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnologies. A non-targeting siRNA (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies) was used as a control-siRNA for the transfection experiments. A second independent set of GATA4 siRNA and GATA6 siRNA was obtained from Ambion (Grand Island, NY). The transfection experiments were performed in H520 and H226 human SCC-Ls. The transfection of 75 nm (of the above) siRNA was performed by using Oligofectamine reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Eighteen hours after transfection the medium was changed to RPMI containing 2.5% FBS along with 100 nm nicotine for 48 h. After 48 h (on day 2), the transfection procedure was repeated. Eighteen hours post transfection the medium was changed to RPMI supplemented with 2.5% FBS along with 100 nm nicotine for 48 h. On day 4, lysates were made, and the relative expression of 7-nAChR and 3-nAChR was measured by ELISA. Each transfection was performed in duplicate, and the entire assay was performed two independent times.
The co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) experiments were performed by using the Mouse TrueBlot or the Rabbit TrueBlot kit (eBioscience, San Diego, CA) according to the manufacturer's protocols. Bound proteins were eluted in SDS sample buffer. The interaction of GATA4 (or GATA6) with Sp1 was probed by immunoblotting using standard protocols.
H520s were grown to 60% confluence in 100-mm tissue culture dishes. Subsequently, the medium was changed to RPMI with 2.5% FBS in the presence or absence of 100 nm nicotine for 48 h. Twenty-five million cells were used per ChIP reaction. The ChIP assay was performed as described previously. The differential binding of Sp1, GATA4 or GATA6 to the Sp1 binding sites on the human 7-nAChR promoter was examined by PCR using the primers listed in Mexal et al. (2010). These primers were 7-nAChR-promoter-Sp1 forward (5AGT ACC TCC CGC TCA CAC CTC G-3) and 7-nAChR-promoter-Sp1 reverse (5-ATG TTG AGT CCC GGA GCT GCA G-3). The PCR was performed using PCR Mastermix (Promega) along with PCR enhancer (2.7 mm betaine, 6.7 mm DTT, 6.7% DMSO, 55 g/ml BSA). The PCR cycling conditions were 95 °C for 2 min, then 30 cycles of 95 °C for 30 s, 58 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 30 s followed by 72 °C for 2 min.
PCR for the region 267 to 37 bp of the human eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) promoter (which lacks Sp1 binding sites) was used as the negative control for the ChIP reaction. The primers used were eIF4E forward (5-GTTGAGAACCGCGCACCCTACC-3) and eIF4E reverse (5-CACCGGTTCGACAGTCGCCATC-3). The PCR cycling conditions were 95 °C for 2 min, then 30 cycles of 95 °C for 30 s, 65 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 3 min followed by 72 °C for 5 min.
ChIP-re-ChIP assay was performed according to the protocol described by Pillai et al.. The primary IP reaction was performed using monoclonal anti-human Sp1 antibody as described above. The immune complexes were eluted twice from the primary IP reaction by incubation with 10 mm DTT at 37 °C for 30 min. Subsequently the eluates were pooled, diluted 1:10 in with Re-ChIP buffer, and re-immunoprecipitated with 5 g of GATA4 or GATA6 polyclonal antibody. The protocol for preclearing and the IP reaction were identical to those described above for one-step ChIP assay. The differential occupancy of the Sp1 binding sites on the human 7-nAChR promoter was analyzed by PCR as detailed above.
ChIP assays involving human SCC-L tumors from patients were performed using 2.5 mg of each tumor tissue per immunoprecipitation reaction. The ChIP assay was performed using the MAGnify Chromatin Immunoprecipitation System (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The PCR for Sp1 sites on the 7-nAChR promoter and eIF4E was performed as described above.
All data were represented as the mean  S.E. (GraphPad Prism 5, La Jolla, CA). Results from the control and treated samples were compared using an analysis of variance followed by a Neumann-Keuls multiple comparison test. Those experiments involving only vehicle-treated and nicotine-treated samples were compared using a paired t test. All analyses were completed using a 95% confidence interval. Data were considered significant when p  0.05.