Rat bone-marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) were isolated by aspiration of the femur and tibia and suspended in culture medium comprising Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 10% heat inactivated fetal calf serum, 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 g/ml streptomycin with the addition of 20% L929-conditioned medium produced using a standard protocol. This yields a population of > 95% macrophages after 7 days of culture. Blood was donated by consenting healthy volunteers as approved by the Ethics Review Board of the College of Life Science & Medicine, University of Aberdeen. Human macrophages and T cells were prepared from peripheral blood mononuclear cells separated by density gradient centrifugation using a Lymphoprep„¢ gradient medium (Axis-Shield, Dundee, UK) according to the manufacturer's instructions. CD14+ monocytes and CD3+ T cells were isolated by positive selection from peripheral blood mononuclear cells using antibody conjugated MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec, Bisley, Surrey, UK). Monocytes were matured to macrophages by culture for 7 days in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium supplemented with penicillin/streptomycin and 10% de-complemented sterile-filtered human AB+ serum. Nephrotoxic serum was produced according to our standard protocol.
Inbred male, Sprague Dawley rats (200250 g) were bred under standard conditions and maintained in all cases in accordance with United Kingdom Home Office regulations. The animals were permitted access to food and water ad libitum, and were maintained in a temperature- and humidity-controlled room under a 12 hr daynight cycle. Peritonitis was induced by intraperitoneal injection of 1 ml 8% [weight/volume (wt/vol)] thioglycollate in sterile saline followed 4 days later by intraperitoneal injection of 3 mg/kg LPS from Escherichia coli (Sigma Aldrich, Poole, UK) and adoptively transferred macrophages (6  106 to 10  106 cells per rat). Animals were killed 4 hr after adoptive transfer of cells. Nephrotoxic nephritis was induced by pre-immunization with subcutaneous injection of 1 mg of rabbit IgG (Sigma-Aldrich) in Freund's complete adjuvant and intravenous injection 1 week later with rabbit nephrotoxic serum. This results in macrophage infiltration, acute glomerular injury, and crescent formation. Rats were housed in metabolic cages for 14 hr for urine collection. Urine albumin concentration was determined using rocket electrophoresis and albuminuria was calculated as the total albumin excreted over 24 hr. Sections of renal tissue fixed in methyl Carnoy's fixative were paraffin embedded, and 5-m sections were cut before routine staining with haematoxylin & eosin.
Knockdown experiments were performed using pre-designed and validated short interfering RNA (siRNA) for SOCS3 (rat 192802, human s17191, Invitrogen, Life Technologies, Paisley, UK), SOCS1 (s16469, Invitrogen) or a non-targeting siRNA sequence control (4390844, Invitrogen) containing at least four mismatches to any mouse, human or rat gene. BMDM or human macrophages were transfected using Lipofectamine RNAi Max (Invitrogen) in serum-free medium according to the manufacturer's instructions. Three SOCS3 siRNA sequences were compared for level of knockdown and the one giving most efficient silencing was used in both cases. Mock transfection using Lipofectamine RNAi Max, but no siRNA and no transfection controls, was included. In brief, at day 6 of differentiation, macrophages were plated in antibiotic-free medium and transfected. After overnight incubation, the medium was supplemented with antibiotics and cells incubated at 37° for 48 hr before treatment. SOCS siRNA transfection efficiency was 89  9% as determined by counts for the number of macrophages containing fluorescently tagged siRNA (Invitrogen). Knockdown efficacy was analysed by means of PCR and Western blotting. Cell viability was not altered by transfection reagent alone (mock transfection 98·9  1·2%) or by transfection with siRNA (99·0  0·7%). Moreover, the siRNA transfection procedure used did not stimulate IFN- responses in macrophages as assessed by analysis of expression of IFN--responsive genes.
Control siRNA or SOCS3 siRNA transfected BMDM were labelled with the fluorescent dyes PKH2 or PKH26L (Sigma Aldrich), injected into the activated peritoneum and conditioned for 4 hr. Peritoneal exudate cells were harvested from the animals by injecting 20 ml sterile PBS through a small incision in the wall of the peritoneal cavity. The abdomen was massaged and the contents were transferred into a sterile polypropylene tube. Adoptively transferred cells that had been conditioned in the inflamed peritoneum were recovered by cell sorting based on positivity in the FL1 channel in a Becton Dickinson BD FACSVantage SE Cytometer System, with FACSDiVa High speed cell sorter (Becton Dickinson, Oxford, UK).
Cell-sorted, control siRNA-treated or SOCS3 knockdown BMDM recovered from the inflamed peritoneum were plated at 2  105 cells in 200 µl per well in a 48-well plate and cultured for 12 hr ex vivo for determination of cytokines (IL-6 and IL-10 kits; BD Biosciences, Oxford, UK) by cytometric bead arrays according to the manufacturer's instructions. NO in the culture medium was assessed by nitrite production using a Greiss reaction. In some experiments rat BMDM were pre-cultured in 24-well plates with the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor LY294002 (20 m) or with vehicle control (0·15% DMSO) for 40 min before the addition of IFN- (20 ng/ml) and LPS (100 ng/ml) for 10 hr to determine IL-6 or NO concentrations as above. Concentrations of IFN-, IL-10 and IL-17 in human cell culture supernatants were determined using ELISA-matched antibody pairs (BD Biosciences). Human IL-1 and IL-23 were analysed using ELISA kits (eBiosciences, San Diego, CA). Human IL-6, tumour necrosis factor- (TNF-) and IL-12p70 were measured by cytometric bead array (BD Biosciences) according to the manufacturer's instructions. NF-B-specific activation in control siRNA- and SOCS3 siRNA-treated macrophages was measured using a TransAM ELISA-based kit (Active Motif, Carlsbad, CA) performed on nuclear extracts of BMDM according to the manufacturer's protocol. Nuclear extracts were obtained using a nuclear extraction kit (Active Motif) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Total numbers of glomerular CD68+ macrophages were detected in methyl Carnoy's-fixed tissue by ED1 antibodies (AbD Serotec, Kidlington, UK) and the Vectastain Elite ABC-Kit (Vector laboratories, Peterborough, UK) with appropriate biotinylated secondary antibodies. The peroxidase reaction product was visualized using 3,3-diaminobenzidine (Sigma-Aldrich) as a chromogenic substrate and H2O2 as co-substrate. The numbers of CD68-positive glomerular macrophages that stained for SOCS1 and/or SOCS3 were determined semi-quantitatively by co-localization studies using triple immunostaining in the same methyl Carnoy's fixed kidney sections as follows. After quenching of endogenous peroxidase activity with 3% (vol/vol) H2O2 in methanol, tissues were blocked with 1% (wt/vol) horse serum. To analyse the numbers of SOCS1/SOCS3-positive glomerular macrophages, kidney sections were incubated with goat anti-rat SOCS1 (1/200; Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and rabbit anti-rat SOCS3 (1/500; Abcam), followed by the secondary antibodies anti-rabbit TRITC and anti-goat FITC, respectively. The sections were subsequently stained with ED1 antibody, peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody and 3,3-diaminobenzidine (Sigma-Aldrich) as above. Negative controls without primary antibody confirmed the specificity of the reactions. Images were captured using an Olympus 1  70 microscope. At least five glomeruli were imaged per section for SOCS1/SOCS3-positive, CD68-positive macrophages. The basal fluorescence (or chromogenic staining) was obtained, and a threshold was automatically calculated, using sections without primary antibody (negative control). Positive (SOCS1hi or SOCS3hi) macrophages were counted as those with a fluorescence intensity that exceeded the thresholds set for the red and green channels; macrophages exhibiting no more than background fluorescence were considered as SOCS1lo or SOCS3lo, as described previously. The intensity of staining was typically bimodal  those macrophages with strong fluorescence and those with staining indistinguishable from background, as previously illustrated. Captured images were merged to identify SOCS1/SOCS3-positive macrophages and the proportions of SOCS1hi/lo SOCS3hi/lo macrophages per glomerulus were determined.
Alternatively, to determine the proportions of SOCS1hi/loiNOShi/lo and SOCS3hi/lo iNOShi/lo macrophages, sections were quenched and blocked as above and triple stained with ED1 and rabbit anti-rat inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), followed by fluorescently labelled secondary antibodies and then goat anti-rat SOCS3 or SOCS1 (1 : 200; Abcam) with peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody and 3,3-diaminobenzidine. To minimize inter-assay variation, all samples were processed in the same batch. Images were captured and staining intensity thresholds were set based on negative controls, without application of the primary antibody as above. As with SOCS1/SOCS3-positive macrophages, captured images were merged to identify proportions of SOCS1hi/lo iNOShi/lo and SOCS3hi/lo iNOShi/lo macrophages and expressed as percentage of positive macrophages per glomerulus.
Macrophages recovered from the inflamed peritoneum were pelleted and lysed and total RNA was prepared using the Trizol extraction reagent (Invitrogen) followed by RNA clean-up using an RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen, Manchester, UK) according to the manufacturer's instructions. A total of 5 g from each sample was reverse transcribed using the first-strand cDNA synthesis kit and oligo(dT) primer as recommended by the manufacturer (Invitrogen) in a 15-l reaction volume. Relative quantification of the genes of interest was measured as described elsewhere. For each gene, the PCR was performed on 50, 100 and 200 ng of the cDNA using the following primers:
SOCS1 forward 5-ATGGTAGCACGTAACCAG-3
SOCS1 reverse 5-CTCCAGCAGCTCGAAGAG-3;
SOCS3 forward 5-ACCAGCGCCACTTCTTCACA-3
SOCS3 reverse 5-GTGGAGCATCATACTGGTCC-3;
iNOS forward 5-TCTTGGTGAAAGCGGTGTT-3
iNOS reverse 5-TGTTGCGTTGGAAGTGTAGC-3;
arginase I forward 5-TATCTGCCAAGGACATCGTG-3
arginase I reverse 5-GTTCTGTTCGGTTTGCTGT-3;
IL-10 forward 5-CTCCACTGCCTTGCTTTTA-3
IL-10 reverse 5-CACTGCTATGTTGCCTGCTC-3;
CD206 (mannose receptor) forward 5-AACAAGAATGGTGGGCAGTC-3
CD206 (mannose receptor) reverse 5-AACTCCTCGTCCGTCTGTC-3;
GAPDH forward 5-TGACATCAAGAAGGTGGTGAAG-3
GAPDH reverse 5-TCTTACTCCTTGGAGGCCATGT-3.
Protein lysates were prepared from BMDM using lysis buffer and 20 g separated by SDSPAGE and transferred to Immobilon P membrane (Millipore, Watford, UK) for Western blot analysis with specific primary antibodies for SOCS3, IB and p-IB (Abcam), AKT and p-AKT ser473 (Cell Signaling Technology, Herts, UK), p65 and p-p65 ser536 (New England Biolabs, Herts, UK) and -actin (Sigma-Aldrich). Immunolabelled proteins were detected by using appropriate horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies, followed by visualization with ECL (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK). Bands were normalized to -actin.
Human macrophages (1  105/well) were pre-treated with or without LPS or IFN-/LPS (20/500 ng/ml) for 7 hr and pulsed with 5 g/ml of a nominal antigen (keyhole limpet haemocyanin) that elicits T-cell responses indirectly via macrophages. Macrophages were washed several times and co-cultured with autologous CD4+ T cells (ratio 1 : 5). After 8 days, T-cell proliferation was measured by [3H]thymidine incorporation and cytokine secretion by ELISA.
Results are presented as mean  SD and differences between groups of cells or animals were determined by Student's t-test or two-way analysis of variance followed by a multiple range test (Tukey analysis). For experiments with human macrophages a Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to compare differences between groups. Correlations between macrophage numbers and albuminuria were assessed by linear regression analysis. Values of P < 0·05 were considered significant.