The study was conducted according to the principles expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki, and the ethics committee of the National Cancer Center approved the study protocol and all patients provided written informed consent to participate.
Characteristics of the 88 soft tissue tumors used in this study are shown in Table S1. All patients had received a histological diagnosis of primary soft tissue tumor at National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, between 1996 and 2002. Tumor samples were obtained at the time of excision and cryopreserved in liquid nitrogen until use. 
For RNA extraction, trained pathologists carefully excised the tissue samples from the main tumor, leaving a margin clear from the surrounding non-tumorous tissue. Microscopically, the samples may still contain several non-tumor cells. Elimination of non-tumor stromal cells is important for gene expression analyses in carcinomas since tumor tissues contain a significant number of non-tumor stromal cells, including fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and inflammatory cells. Otherwise, tumor tissues contain very few non-tumor stromal cells for soft tissue sarcomas. Furthermore, soft tissue sarcomas contain non-tumor stromal cells, which are difficult to eliminate since soft tissue sarcoma originates from mesenchymal cells. Therefore, laser microdissection was not performed in this study. Total RNAs extracted from the bulk tissue samples were biotin-labeled and hybridized to high-density oligonucleotide microarrays (Human Genome U133A 2.0 Array, Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA) comprising 22,283 probe sets representing 18,400 transcripts, according to the manufacturer's instructions. The scanned array data were processed by Affymetrix Microarray Suite v.5.1 (MAS5), which scaled the average intensity of all the genes on each array to the target signal of 1,000. The microarray data in the present paper are available from the Genome Medicine Database of Japan (GeMDBJ) (https://gemdbj.nibio.go.jp/dgdb/) under the accession number EXPR058P.
We excluded 68 controls and 2,343 genes that were subject to cross-hybridization according to NetAffx Annotation (www.affymetrix.com). Furthermore, we excluded those genes for which more than 10 percent (8/88) of the samples showed an absent call (i.e., the detection call determined by MAS5 based on the p value of the one-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test; absent call corresponds to p ¥ 0.065, which is the default threshold in MAS5), since this indicates that the expression signal was undetectable. We also excluded those genes that showed an interquartile range value of less than 2,000. In total, 1,376 genes were selected, to which we applied log-transformation or binarization using the median values as the threshold for each gene. The two types of datasets, binarized and log-transformed, were used for Welch's t-test and the log-rank test, respectively. 
We calculated p values by applying Welch's t-test for discrimination between MFH and MFS, and by applying the log-rank test in the survival analysis of all STS patients for the 1,376 filtered genes. We defined the integrated statistic p' as p 1  p 2, where p 1 indicates the p value calculated by Welch's t-test and p 2 indicates the p value calculated by the log-rank test. STS patients (n = 35; 20 MFH patients and 15 MFS patients) were used in both these tests, and the outcomes between MFH and MFS were significantly different. We therefore conducted a simulation based on the permutation test as shown in Figure 1 to estimate the corrected p values to address this problem, as well as the multiple testing problems. 
Median values of gene expression signals for each gene were calculated and patients were divided into 2 groups using the median values as the threshold for each gene. Log-rank tests were conducted for the outcome of STS patients for each gene, and Spearman's rank correlation coefficients for relationships between histological grades (or tumor metastases) and gene expression signals were also calculated. In the present study, we analyzed over 50 months of follow-up information as censored data. Kaplan-Meier curves were drawn for all STS patients, and those positive for MIF, SCD1, and the combination of MIF and SCD1.
Murine sarcoma Sendai (MuSS), a malignant fibrous histiocytoma cell line, was provided by the Cell Resource Center for Biomedical Research Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University. Cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium containing 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin solution. Cell cultures were incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2, and 100% humidity. 4-Iodo-6-phenylpyrimidine (4-IPP) (purchased from TOCRIS Bioscience, Bristol, UK) and A939572 (purchased from Biofine International, Vancouver, BC, Canada) were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).
For the determination of concentrations for the combination of 4-IPP (MIF inhibitor) and A939572 (SCD1 inhibitor), cells were plated in 96-well plates (10,000 cells per well). After 24 h of incubation, cells were treated with 4-IPP at concentrations ranging from 5µM to 50 µM, A939572 at concentrations ranging from 1 nM to 1000 nM, a combination of both, or DMSO only (control). After 24 h of incubation of cells with these compounds, cell viability was measured using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. Metabolically active cells can convert the yellow tetrazolium salt MTT to indigo blue formazan. For the assay, the medium were removed gently and the cells were washed with PBS. Subsequently, medium containing 0.5 g/L MTT was added to each well. After 2 h of incubation of the cells with MTT, the medium was removed gently and the cells were washed with PBS. To dissolve the indigo blue formazan crystals, 100µL DMSO was added. The optical density was measured on a microplate reader at 540 nm. All in vitro studies were repeated 3 times.