The biopsies for the chondrocyte establishment were collected after obtaining the patients written consent. The protocol had been approved by the local ethics committee under the Danish National Committee on Research Ethics.
Six primary cell cultures of human chondrocytes derived from hip joint cartilage were used for this study. Four of them were purchased from Provitro (Berlin, Germany). Two further chondrocyte cell cultures were kindly provided by the Orthopaedic Research Lab, Aarhus University Hospital, and Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Centre (iNANO), Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark. These primary cells were isolated from cartilage biopsies according to a protocol described by Foldager et al.. The biopsies have been collected from the intercondylar groove in the distal femur from healthy patients undergoing anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction after obtaining the patients written consent.
All cultures were grown in DMEM/F-12 medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Provitro, Berlin, Germany), 100 IU penicillin/mL and 100 µg streptomycin/mL (Biochrom, Berlin, Germany), in 75 cm2 cell culture flasks (Sarstedt, Nmbrecht, Germany). Air exchange in the culture flasks was assured using a waterproof, but air-permeable membrane in the cap of the flasks.
Cells cultured in our laboratory from frozen stocks were utilized at passage levels three to eight for all tests. Fresh human chondrocytes were first expanded in a monolayer for 710 days to reach confluence. Sub-confluent monolayers (1106 cells/cm2) were randomized to the following study groups: 300 static control cultures for the PCR analyses (nŠ=Š10 for each time point and donor), 300 static control cultures for the Western Blot analyses (nŠ=Š10 for each time point and donor), 300 samples for the RPM experiments for the PCR analyses (nŠ=Š10 for each time point and donor) and 300 samples for the RPM experiments for Western Blot analyses (nŠ=Š10 for each time point and donor). In addition, cells of each chondrocyte cell line were seeded in Super Cell chamber slides (1 g and RPM group) for histochemical and immunocytochemical staining.
Microgravity conditions were simulated using a Desktop Random Positioning Machine (RPM), manufactured by Dutch Space (an Astrium Company, Leiden, Netherlands). The RPM is a laboratory instrument, enabling the position of an accommodated (biological) experiment in three-dimensional space to be randomly altered by dedicated software running on a personal computer. Culture flasks containing sub-confluent monolayers were completely filled with medium devoid of air bubbles and fixed on the RPM, as close as possible to the centre of the platform (Fig. 1), which was then rotated at a speed of 60°/s using the real random mode (random speed and random direction) of the machine. The RPM was positioned in a commercially available incubator set at 37°C and supplying 5% CO2. 1 g ground control cultures, treated in parallel in identical equipment, were placed in the same incubator as the RPM (Fig. 1).
Following the RPM run, the chondrocytes were stained with haematoxylin and eosin to gain an overview of the tissue structure and cell distributions. The viability and the deposition of glycosaminoglycans of the control and RPM-exposed cells were examined using Neutral Red and Alcian Blue staining, respectively (both from Sigma, Taufkirchen, Germany). For this purpose, the cells were fixed for 10 min with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA in DPBS), washed twice with DPBS, stained with a drop of the diluted staining solution (diluted according to the manufacturers instructions), washed twice with DPBS again and mounted with Entellan (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) for further microscopic analysis.
For immunofluorescence staining, the cells (1106 cells/cm2) were seeded into several four-chamber Super Cell chamber slides (BD, Heidelberg, Germany) and placed in the incubator (37°C, 5% CO2) overnight, until they attached to the slides. The next day, the slides were completely filled with medium, sealed with paraffin, and placed on the RPM for the run. After the run, the chondrocytes were washed twice with DPBS, fixed for 30 min with 4% paraformaldehyde (4°C), and permeabilised with Triton X-100 (Sigma, Taufkirchen, Germany). The cells were then washed twice in DPBS and incubated with primary antibody for 24 h at room temperature. The morphology of the microtubules (beta-tubulin, 11000; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA, USA), and intermediate filaments (vimentin, 11000; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA, USA) was determined by indirect immunofluorescence (IIF). In addition, BMP-2 (dilution 1100; Abcam, Cambridge, UK) was evaluated by IIF. After incubation with primary antibody, the chondrocytes were washed twice with DPBS and incubated for 2 h with the secondary FITC-tagged antibody, used at a dilution of 1500 (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA, USA). For nuclear staining, the cells were further incubated with propidium iodide (1100; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) for 10 min, mounted with Vectashield immunofluorescence mounting medium (Vector, Burlingame, CA, USA), and analysed microscopically.
F-actin was visualised by means of rhodamine-phalloidin staining (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA). For this purpose, seeded cells were fixed for 30 min with 4% PFA (in DPBS), washed twice with DPBS, incubated with 5 µg/ml fluorescent phalloidin conjugate solution in PBS/1% BSA for at least 20 min at room temperature and then washed several times with PBS to remove unbound phalloidin conjugate. Afterwards, the nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA) for 5 min and washed twice with DPBS. For evaluation, the samples were mounted with Vectashield (Vector, Burlingame, CA, USA) and analysed microscopically.
The viability and morphology of the cells grown on four-chamber Super Cell slides (BD, Heidelberg, Germany) were examined by phase-contrast microscopy (Olympus, Hamburg, Germany) immediately after RPM exposure. Immunofluorescence and F-actin staining were analysed with a Zeiss 510 META inverted confocal laser scanning microscope (Zeiss, Germany), equipped with a Plan-Apochromat 631.4 objective. Excitation and emission wavelengths were: » excŠ=Š488 nm and » emŠ=Š¥505 nm for FITC. All samples were analysed with the help of the image analysis program Scion Image (Version 1.63 MacOs, Scion Corporation, USA).
Ten cell culture flasks from each time point and donor were used for RNA extraction. The cells were scraped off using cell scrapers (Sarstedt, Nmbrecht, Germany), transferred to 50 ml tubes, and pelleted by centrifugation (2500 g, 10 min, 4°C). The RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used according to the manufacturers instructions to isolate total RNA. RNA concentrations and quality were determined spectrophotometrically at 260 nm using a NanoDrop instrument (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA). The isolated RNA had an A260/280 ratio of 1.5 or higher. cDNA designated for quantitative real-time PCR was then obtained using the First-Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Fermentas, St. Leon-Rot, Germany) using 1 µg of total RNA in a 20-µl reaction mixture at room temperature. Details of this method are available elsewhere.
Quantitative real-time PCR was used to determine the expression levels of the genes of interest (Table 1): ACTA2, ACTB, VIM, TUBB6, ITGB1, BMP2, OPN, and TGFB1 genes after 30 min, 2 h, 4 h, 16 h, and 24 h incubation under simulated microgravity (µg) compared to the static control group (1 g). Primer Express software (Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany) was employed to design appropriate primers with a Tm of about 60°C (Table 1). The primers were synthesised by TIB Molbiol (Berlin, Germany). All assays were run on a 7500 fast real-time PCR system using the Fast SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany). The reaction volume was 25 µL including 1 µL of template cDNA and a final random hexamer primer concentration of 500 nM. PCR conditions were as follows: 20 s at 95°C, 40 cycles of 3 s at 95°C, and 30 s at 60°C, followed by a melting curve analysis step (temperature gradient from 60 to 95°C with +0.3°C/cycle).
If all amplicons showed a single Tm similar to the one predicted by the Primer Express software, the PCR reactions were considered specific. Every sample was measured in triplicate. The comparative CT (CT) method was used for the relative quantification of transcription levels. 18S rRNA was used as a housekeeping gene to normalise expression data.
Gel electrophoresis, trans-blotting, and densitometry were carried out following routine protocols as described previously. An equal amount of 20 µL of lysate, containing 3 µg/µL protein, was loaded onto SDS-PAGE. Each Western blot was performed three times for each donor, whereby each sample was applied three times. Anti-beta-actin, anti-beta-tubulin, anti-vimentin, and anti-TGF-1 antibodies were used at a dilution of 11000 (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA, USA); anti-osteopontin antibody was used at a dilution of 11000 (Rockland Immunochemicals Inc., Gilbertsville, USA), as well as anti-integrin-beta1 antibody (Epitomics, Burlingame, USA); anti-BMP-2 antibody was applied at a dilution of 1100 (Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany). The secondary, HRP-linked antibody was utilised at a dilution of 13000 (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA, USA). Protein from the 3T3 Swiss Albino cell line (ATCC) was used as a positive control.
For the densitometric quantification of the bands, the membranes were analysed using ImageJ software (U.S. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/).
All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 21.0 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA, 2012). We tested all parameters achieved via PCR and Western blot analyses using one-way ANOVA or the Mann-Whitney U test (depending on the results of a normality test). All data are expressed as means  standard deviation (SD). Differences were considered significant at p<0.05 (#).