Participants were recruited from the RA Outpatient Unit at Higashihiroshima Memorial Hospital. Patients were considered eligible if they fulfilled the American Rheumatism Association revised criteria for classification of RA and their disease duration was longer than six months. Patients who had received erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESAs) or iron (oral or intravenous) during the two months prior to the initiation of this study were excluded. The eligible patients who had responded insufficiently to treatment with at least one disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD) or immunosuppressant were recommended for treatment with tocilizumab or TNF- inhibitors by their attending physicians. The choice of treatment was made at the discretion of these attending physicians. From among eligible patients who started tocilizumab or TNF- inhibitor therapy after June 2008, 50 consecutive patients in each treatment group were enrolled. Four patients in the tocilizumab group and three in the TNF- inhibitor group dropped out of the study because of severe infection or for personal reasons. As a result, a total of 93 patients comprising 46 tocilizumab users and 47 TNF- inhibitor users were analyzed in this study. The TNF- inhibitor users were initiated on treatment with any of three inhibitors (etanercept, n = 22; infliximab, n = 14; or adalimumab, n = 11), together with oral methotrexate at a standard dose, unless the rheumatologist decided otherwise. Tocilizumab was infused in principle every four weeks at a dose of 8 mg/kg, a rate based on our previous dose determination studies. Blood samples were obtained before treatment and 2, 4, 8 and 16 weeks after the initiation of treatment and then separated by centrifugation at 3,000 rpm and stored at 80°C until assayed.
Serum hepcidin-25 in all RA patients and in 16 healthy volunteers was quantified using a liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry-based assay system as reported previously. IL-6, TNF- and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) were measured using the Bio-Plex Suspension Array System (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Tokyo, Japan). Serum hematological parameters were measured using standard laboratory techniques. Disease Activity Score in 28 joints (DAS28), used to assess patient reported outcome, was measured at baseline and at 16 weeks. This study was approved by the ethics committee of Higashihiroshima Memorial Hospital, and informed consent was obtained from all patients.
Recombinant human IL-6 was provided by Ajinomoto (Kawasaki, Japan), and recombinant human TNF- and IL-1 were purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA). Humanized anti-IL-6 receptor antibody (anti-IL6R Ab; tocilizumab) was produced and provided by Chugai Pharmaceutical Co Ltd (Tokyo, Japan), and anti-TNF- Ab (infliximab) was provided by Mitsubishi-Tanabe Pharmaceutical Co Ltd (Tokyo, Japan). The human hepatoma cell lines PLC/PRF/5 and Hep3B were donated by Tohoku University (Sendai, Japan) and were grown in Dulbeccos modified Eagles medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 50 U/ml penicillin-streptomycin. The monocyte cell line U937 (American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, VA, USA) was cultured in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% heat-inactivated FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 g/ml streptomycin.
Cells were seeded at 5  105 cells/well in six-well plates and stimulated with IL-6 (10 ng/ml), TNF- (10 ng/ml) and IL-1 (10 ng/ml) under subconfluent conditions. The effect of IL-6 or TNF- blockage was investigated by means of preincubation for 30 minutes with tocilizumab (25 g/ml) or infliximab (25 g/ml). To test the effect of TNF- on IL-6 and ferroportin expression in monocytic cells, U937 cells were treated with 0.01 to 10 ng/ml recombinant TNF- for six hours. To test the effect of TNF- on IL-6-induced hepcidin expression in hepatocytic cells, PLC/PRF/5 and Hep3B cells were incubated with 0.01 to 10 ng/ml recombinant TNF- for 30 minutes and then treated with IL-6. After six hours of TNF- or IL-6 treatment, total RNA was extracted with the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturers instructions. cDNA was then synthesized with Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 25-l reactions containing 2 g of total RNA. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR was performed with the GeneAmp 7000 Sequence Detection System and SYBR Green dye (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) according to the manufacturers protocol. The following PCR primers were used for amplifying human hepcidin cDNA: forward primer, 5-CCTGACCAGTGGCTCTGTTT-3, and reverse primer, 5CACATCCCACACTTTGATCG-3; for amplifying human IL-6 cDNA: forward primer, 5-ATTCGGTACATCCTCGACGGCA-3, and reverse primer, 5-CAGCCATCTTTGGAAGGTTCAGGT-3; and for amplifying human ferroportin cDNA: forward primer, 5-CCCGGAGACAAGTCCTGAATC-3, and reverse primer, 5-TGGCCCATTGCCACAAAGGAG-3. The PCR was performed for a final volume of 50 l comprising 2  25 l SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems). Thermal cycle parameters were 2 minutes at 50°C and 10 minutes at 95°C, followed by 40 cycles of amplification with 15 seconds at 95°C for denaturation and 1 minute at 60°C for annealing and elongation. 2 microglobulin was used as an internal control for correction of hepcidin expression. Experiments were performed in triplicate, and each was repeated three times with consistent results.
The overall effect of treatment was evaluated with the paired t-test on the basis of changes from baseline level observed at different intervals following tocilizumab and TNF- inhibitor administration. Group comparisons were performed with Pearsons correlation test. The values of serum hepcidin-25, ferritin and VEGF were log-transformed to normalize the distribution before correlation analyses. Data are expressed as means  SD or SEM as indicated in the figure legends. P < 0.05 was considered significant.