1. Blood was anonymously collected from unidentified health donors with approval from the University of Hawaii Committee on Human Studies (UHCHS); Healthy blood donors signed a written consent form outlining the procedure for this study; both the consent form and procedures were approved by the UHCHS. 2. Laboratory mice were used for experimental tests with approval from the University of Hawaii Animal Care and Use Committee in accordance with the Animal Welfare Act and NIH guidelines.
Generation of a HIV-1-based lentiviral vector containing an expression cassette for hBDNF was constructed. Briefly, the synthetic gene was amplified by PCR, using primer pair (5-GCCTCGAGCTAATGACCATCCTTTTCCTTAC TA-3 and 5-GCGGATCCGACCTATCTTCCCCTTTTAATGGT-3) containing Xho I and BamH I restriction sites within the 5 and 3 termini, respectively, and inserted into the pDHR-HB7-IRES-GFP plasmid (generously provided by Dr. V. Planelles, University of Utah) that was digested with the same enzymes. The final bicistronic plasmid construct, pDHR-hBDNF-eGFP, was designed to co-express the hBDNF protein and the enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP). LVs encoding the hBDNF or control gene were generated by transient transfection of 293T cells. Vector production, concentration, and titration were performed as described previously, except that 293T cells were used for vector titration. Briefly, 293T cells were incubated with 10-fold dilutions of concentrated virus and 8 mg/mL Polybrene (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hour. Fluorescence-positive cell counting to determine eGFP-positive cells was carried out at 72 hours post-transduction, and vector titers were calculated as follows: titerŠ=ŠFC 0/VD (where D is the virus dilution factor, V is the number of 293T cells at the time of seeding per inoculum, F is the frequency of eGFP-positive 293T cells, and C 0 is the number of 293T cells at the time of seeding per mL).
Human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells (GenHunter Co., Nashville, TN) were maintained in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM)(Sigma-Aldrich) containing 1.0 g/L glucose, 2 mM L-glutamine (Sigma-Aldrich), 100 IU/mL penicillin (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1…µg/mL streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (HyClone). Three human neuronal cell lines, neuroepithelioma cells (HTB-10, or SK-N-MC), neuroblastoma cells (HTB-11 or SK-N-SH, and SH-SY5Y), and glioblastoma cells (HTB-14; or U-87) (ATCC, Manassas, VA), were cultured in Minimum Essential Medium (Eagle) (MEM) (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 1.0 mM sodium pyruvate, 100 IU/mL penicillin, 0.1…µg/mL streptomycin and 10% FBS. The human embryonic microglial cell line CHME-5 (provided by Dr. Pierre Talbot, Universite du Quebec) was cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM) (Sigma-Aldrich) containing 4.5 g/L glucose, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 IU/mL penicillin, 0.1…µg/mL streptomycin and 10% FBS. Human monocytic cell line U937 (ATCC Manassas, VA), was cultured in RPMI1640 (Sigma- Aldrich) supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 1.0 mM sodium pyruvate, 100 IU/mL penicillin, 0.1…µg/mL streptomycin and 10% FBS.
Blood was drawn from consented healthy donors into BD Vacutainer„¢ ACD (Beckton Dickinson), and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated by density-gradient centrifugation through Ficoll-Paque„¢ PLUS (GE Healthcare). The purified PBMC were then resuspended in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated human serum (Sigma- Aldrich), 20% heat-inactivated FBS, 100 IU/mL penicillin, 100…µg/mL streptomycin sulfate and 0.292 mg/mL L-glutamine. The purified PBMC were then seeded into 25 cm2 tissue culture flasks (Corning) at 1.8107 cells and incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2 to allow the attachment of freshly isolated monocytes. Following a 3 hours incubation, non-adherent cells were removed by aspiration and the remaining adherent cells were washed extensively with Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS) (Sigma), prior to the addition of 4 mL RPMI-1640 growth medium per flask, and subsequent cultivation at 37°C. Cell growth and monolayer formation were observed daily using a phase-contrast inverted microscope (Nikon).
To verify the purity of the attached cells, these monolayer cultures were stained with human CD11b monoclonal antibody conjugated with PE (Caltag Laboratories, CA, USA). Briefly, the antibody was diluted 100 times with 1% BSA (Sigma) in DPBS and hMDM cultures, and at day 7 were stained with the diluted antibody. After 12 hours incubation, stained cells were rinsed twice with DPBS, and then examined under an inverted fluorescence microscope.
For murine myeloid monocyte-derived macrophages (mMDM), the method was conducted according to Dou et al. In brief, BALB/c mice (Frederick National Laboratory of the National Cancer Institute) were euthanized via CO2 chamber and femurs of the mice were removed. After removing the muscle, bone marrow cells were flushed with DPBS from the bone shafts into single-cell suspensions, and cultured for 5 days supplemented with 1000 U/mL M-CSF (Wyeth). Cultured mMDM proved to be >98% CD11b+ by immunofluorescent staining with PE-conjugated rat monoclonal antibodies directed against mouse CD11b (Caltag Laboratories, CA, USA).
Briefly, 5105 HTB-10, HTB-11 (neuronal) or CHME-5 (microglial) cells were subcultured in 25 cm2 tissue culture flasks for 24 hours before transduction. For transduction, cell culture media were removed and cells were washed twice with DPBS followed by adding 0.5 mL vector suspension (1107 IU/mL, MOIŠ=Š10, for HTB-11, MOIŠ=Š1) containing 8…µg/mL polybrene, and affected cells were incubated at 37°C for 2 hours. Vector suspension was aspirated and transduced cells were added to 4 mL/flask of fresh growth medium and incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2. The medium was replaced 24 hours post-infection and transduction efficiencies were evaluated on day 3 post-infection. The percentage of GFP positive cells was determined by calculating the number of GFP positive cells and total cells from randomly selected microscopic fields under a fluorescence microscope (Nikon Eclipse TE2000-U). A total of 5 microscopic fields, each containing at least 100 cells, were counted for each transduction test.
hMDM were seeded to 12.5 cm2 tissue culture flasks at a density of 1.8107 cells per flask. Six days later, transductions were performed using MOIŠ=Š50 by thawing the titrated virus stocks at room temperature, mixing the appropriate volume of virus concentrate with 8 mg/mL Polybrene (Sigma), and adding the mixture to the target cells together with RPMI to achieve a total volume of 1 mL per flask. mMDM were seeded to 12.5 cm2 tissue culture flasks at a density of 1.0107 cells per flask. Four days later, transductions were performed using MOIŠ=Š50 by thawing the titrated virus stocks at room temperature, mixing the appropriate volume of virus concentrate with 8 mg/mL Polybrene (Sigma), and adding the mixture to the target cells together with RPMI to achieve a total volume of 1 mL per flask. After 2-hour incubation at 37°C, an additional 3 mL of complete RPMI was added per flask. Most of the culture medium was aspirated and replaced by fresh RPMI in the day following transduction. The transduced cells were examined daily using visual inspection by inverted light and fluorescence microscopy.
A 96-well plate was coated with rabbit polyclonal antibodies to human hBDNF (Antigenix America, USA) and incubated overnight at 4°C. The plate was washed three times with 0.05% Tween-20 in PBS and blocked with 1% BSA (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hour at room temperature on an orbital shaker. After washing three times with PBS, the plate was incubated with diluted hBDNF containing supernatant samples for 1 hour and then incubated with biotin-conjugated rabbit polyclonal antibodies to human hBDNF (Antigenix America, USA) for 1 hour. The plate was then washed and incubated with streptavidin-horseradish peroxidase (Rockland) for 1 hour at room temperature. The presence of human hBDNF protein was detected with one-Step Ultra TMB (tetramethylbenzidine) (Pierce). The enzymatic reaction was stopped via the addition of 1 M sulfuric acid. The quantitation of hBDNF protein was based on optical density values at 450 nm with 570 nm as the reference wavelength, and compared with a standard curve of purified human hBDNF protein (Antigenix America, USA), using an ELISA reader (Beckman Coulter AD340).
The supernatant or lysate of transduced- or non-transduced- cells including HTB-10, HTB-11, and CHME-5 cells, was mixed with 6 sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) sample buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl at pH 6.8, 200 mM dithiothreitol, 4% SDS, 0.2% bromophenol blue, and 20% glycerol) and loaded on 5% stacking/15% separating SDS-polyacrylamide gels. Following electrophoresis at 30 mA for 1 hour, separated proteins were transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane (NCM) (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The membranes were saturated with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Sigma-Aldrich) in TBST buffer containing 10 mM Tris- HCl at pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.05% Tween-20 for 1 hour at room temperature, followed by overnight incubation with diluted rabbit polyclonal antibodies to human hBDNF (Antigenix America, USA) at 4°C. Following extensive washing with TBST, the NCM was incubated with diluted biotin-conjugated rabbit polyclonal antibodies to human hBDNF (Antigenix America, USA) at room temperature for 1 hour, then washed three times with TBST and exposed to a 3,3-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB) substrate (PIERCE, Rockford, IL) for identification of protein bands.
Cells at the exponential growth phase were harvested using trypsin-versene solution (Sigma) and seeded into 96-well plates at 2104 cells/well in 100…µL. Following overnight incubation and the formation of a cell monolayer, test cells were treated with Tumor necrosis factor-1 alpha (TNF-) at selected concentrations. Seventy-two hours later, 20…µL of MTT solution (5 mg/mL) was added to the 100…µL of medium in each well, and the plate incubated at selected temperatures for 4 hour. The solution was removed followed by adding 100…µL/well of DMSO to solubilize the purple formazan crystals produced. Absorbance in each well was measured at 570 nm using a 96-well plate reader (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA).
Expression of eGFP was evaluated by immunochemical staining using selected monoclonal antibodies conjugated with TRITC. Briefly, cells in 48-well plates were washed twice with DPBS, then blocked by DPBS containing 0.5% (w/v) bovine serum albumin (BSA), and then directly stained with the appropriately diluted primary antibody - goat anti-green fluorescent protein (GFP) antibody (Rockland, USA). After incubation for 2 hours in a dark room, the cells were washed with DPBS. The secondary antibody used was Donkey anti-Goat IgG with TRITC (Rockland, USA).Cells were visually examined and documented using an inverted fluorescence microscope (Nikon Eclipse TE2000-U) with a digital camera attachment.
A neuroprotection assay was conducted to assess the degree of that hBDNF in neutralizedthe neurotoxic effects of TNF- (R & D, USA). LV-hBDNF-HTB-10 cells, mock cells, and non-transduced HTB-10 cells were all exposed to TNF- at three different concentrations: 500 ng/mL, 100 ng/mL, and 20 ng/mL, respectively. After 48 hours, MTT assay was performed to determine cell viability by absorbance reading at 570 nm using a microplate reader (Beckman Coulter AD340). T-tests were used to assess any significant differences in cell viability between transduced and non-transduced cells as well as cells receiving conditioned media from transduced or non-transduced cells.
Similarly, HTB-10 cells were exposed to TNF- at 300 ng/mL, 150 ng/mL, and 75 ng/mL, diluted with culture medium or conditioned culture medium (110 dilution) collected from LV-hBDNF-transduced cells. The cell viability in normal culture media or conditioned culture media without TNF- is normalized to be 100%. Additionally, U937 cells were exposed to 16 ng/mL, 8 ng/mL, 4 ng/mL, 2 ng/mL and 1 ng/mL TNF-, which was diluted with culture medium or conditioned culture media from LV-hBDNF-transduced cells. The cell viability from HTB-10 cells not exposed to TNF-, but normal medium or conditioned medium (110 dilution of collected medium from LV-hBDNF-transduced cells) alone was considered 100%. After 4-hour incubation, MTT assay was performed to determine cell viability with results read at 570 nm using a microplate reader (Beckman Coulter AD340).
SH-SY5Y cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA) were pretreated with conditioned media (110 & 120 dilutions) from LV-hBDNF-transduced HTB-11 cells for 1 h, then exposed to HIV-1 Tat protein (200 ng/mL) for 48 hours, and cell viability was determined by MTT assay as described above. T-tests were used to assess any significant differences in cell viability between cells receiving conditioned media from transduced or non-transduced cells.
Transduced primary hMDM were analyzed at day 6 post-transduction. The expression of 24 reference genes was analyzed using GenomeLab GeXP Genetic Analysis System (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA). RNA was extracted from hMDM using Qiagen RNeasy Kit (cat# 74104). First, cells were scraped and pelleted through centrifugation at 4,000 RPM for 5 min. The supernatant was discarded and the cell pellets were resuspended in resuspension buffer. The cells were lysed with lysis buffer and neutralized with neutralization buffer. Cell debris was removed and RNA was captured using an RNeasy spin column, washed twice with wash buffer, and then eluted with RNase free molecular grade water. RNA concentration was determined via spectrophotometer at 260 nm. Human Reference RNA (Beckman Coulter, A54267) was used to develop a standard curve for a human reference multiplex. XP-PCR was performed on sample RNA with reverse transcriptase minus and the test included no template reactions as negative controls and reference RNA as a positive control. KanR RNA (Beckman Coulter, #A85017) was added to each sample as an internal control and two genes were designated as reference genes. XP-PCR was conducted in two stages: the first was the RT reaction in which sample RNA was incubated with DNase/RNase free water, 5 RT buffer, reverse transcriptase, and the reverse primer plex for 1 min at 48°C, 60 min at 42°C, and 5 min at 95°C. And next, PCR was performed where cDNA from the RT reaction was incubated with 5 PCR buffer, 25 mM MgCl2, DNA polymerase, and the forward primer plex for 10 min at 95°C, and 35 cycles of 30 s at 94°C, 30 s at 55°C, and 1 min at 70°C. Finally, amplicons were combined with DNA size standard-400 and sample loading solution (Beckman Coulter, #608098 and #608082), then subjected to capillary electrophoresis. The results were analyzed by Express Profiler and Quant Tool (Beckman Coulter)and normalized to the internal control KanR to eliminate any inter-capillary differences and then normalized a second time to the pre-selected reference genes. Finally, results were compared to the standard curve created for the specific multiplex and normalized values and significance differences between samples were calculated using T-tests.
T-tests were employed in this study for statistical analysis (using Prism software). * indicates 0.01<p0.05; ** indicates p0.01. The data set was exported from GeXP software after normalization to kanamycin. All multiplexes were combined into one Excel data file. The normalized intensity of each replicate was used to calculate an average intensity for each group (i.e. transduced cells and non-transduced cells). The sample groups were compared to each other using a two-tailed T-test, with statistical significance set at p<0.05 (nŠ=Š4). Normalized values were displayed in a bar graph using Excel.