Subject 17510-105 had advanced MPM and was enrolled into a phase I clinical trial (NCT01355965) at the Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania (Philadelphia, PA). Inclusion criteria required age >18 years, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status (PS) of 0 to 1, adequate end organ function and histopathologic confirmation of either epithelial or biphasic MPM. Patients must have progressed on first line therapy with a platinum pemetrexed-based doublet or decided to not pursue standard first line chemotherapy. Subject 21211-101 had metastatic pancreatic cancer (PDA) and was included under a compassionate use study under the same approved Investigational New Drug (IND) application for NCT01355965. Exclusion criteria for both studies included active autoimmune disease requiring immunosuppressive therapy, prior gene therapy or therapy with murine monoclonal antibodies, history of allergy to murine proteins, viral infection with HIV, HCV or HBV, pregnancy and any clinically significant pericardial effusion. Written informed consent was required. The study was approved by local institutional review boards. Both patients were elderly and had advanced chemotherapy-refractory cancer with extensive tumor burden at the time of enrollment (Table S1).
Phase I clinical trial (NCT01355965) was designed to evaluate the manufacturing feasibility and safety of mRNA-transduced CARTmeso cells in patients with advanced MPM; Subject 17510-105 was given 3 infusions under Schedule 1 and 2 of the protocol (Fig. S1B). PDA Subject 21211-101 was given 8 doses by intravenous infusion and 2 intratumoral injections under Schedule 3 (Fig. S1B). Detailed Study design is described in the Supplemental methods.
K562 (ATCC CCL-243) human erythroleukemia line; Panc-1 (ATCC CRL-1469) human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma; BxPc-3 (CRL-1687) human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma; and MiaPaCa (ATCC CRM-CRL-1420D) human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). All cell lines were banked at early passages and maintained in culture under the six month limit for re-characterization. Vials were thawed and maintained in culture for only several weeks at a time. REN, 208, 213, 302, 307, M30, M60 were all derived from mesothelioma patient samples at the University of Pennsylvania. 21211 is a pancreatic adenocarcinoma line developed from ascites from a patient at the University of Pennsylvania. The K562 cells were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA), where the authenticated K562 cell line is deposited. Isoenzyme analysis was performed and they matched the isoenzymes listed on ATCC website: http://www.atcc.org/Products/All/CCL-243.aspx#A7931A04156C4C7FA40828AEF707302F. The cell lines were free from mycoplasma contamination; except for transgene expression and isoenzyme analysis no additional authentication was performed.
The T cells were manufactured as specified by an FDA-approved IND. Patients meeting eligibility criteria underwent a large volume apheresis to isolate T cells for expansion and electroporation with an anti-mesothelin ss1 scFv CAR mRNA construct containing the 4-1BB and TCR- signaling modules, as described previously. Clinical grade in vitro transcribed RNA was produced as described. For patient 21211 (PDA), autologous T cells were obtained from the patients monozygotic twin brother. Briefly, T cells were activated by the addition of bead-immobilized anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies and cultured for 102 days in cell culture medium supplemented with human serum. The expanded T cells were electroporated with mRNA encoding an anti-mesothelin ss1 scFv CAR using a closed system electroporation device (Maxcyte Inc, Rockville, MD). The CARTmeso cells were then cryopreserved in an infusible cryoprotectant supplemented solution. The infused cells were an average of 99.6% and 99.5% CD3+ cells for the MPM and PDA patient, respectively. For the MPM and PDA patient respectively, 98.0% and 99.5% of the infused cells expressed the scFv as assessed by flow cytometry after electroporation. The cell viability was 91.4% (mean) with a range of 87.8%97.1% for the MPM patient, and 91.2% (mean) with a range of 76.0% to 98.6% for the PDA patient. At the time of cell infusion, frozen CARTmeso cell aliquots were thawed and administered to patients in the Clinical Trials Research Center at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania. Figure S1A presents a summary of the manufacturing process for the RNA-modified T cells.
Samples (peripheral blood, bone marrow) were collected in lavender top (K2EDTA) or red top (no additive) Vacutainer tubes (Becton Dickinson). Research tubes were delivered to the laboratory within 2 hours of blood draw, and samples were generally processed within 30 minutes of receipt according to established laboratory standard operating procedures (SOP). Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were purified, processed, and stored in liquid nitrogen as described previously. Serum was isolated from red top tubes by centrifugation, aliquoted in single use 100200 L aliquots and stored at 80° C.
On days +3 and +15 after beginning CARTmeso therapy, ascites was collected by large volume paracentesis on PDA patient 21211-101 as part of the standard of care. An automated total white blood cell count (cells/L) of unprocessed ascites was determined and excess fluid was used to isolate cells by Ficoll-Paque processing which were then cryopreserved. For multi-parametric immunophenotyping, cryopreserved cells were thawed and stained at a density of 1106 cells/100L PBS for 30 minutes on ice using antibody and reagent concentrations recommended by the manufacturer, washed, resuspended in 0.5% paraformaldehyde and analyzed using a BD Fortessa (BD Immunocytometry systems equipped with Violet (405 nm), Blue (488 nm), Green (532 nm), and Red (633 nm) lasers and appropriate filter sets for detection and separation of the following fluorescently-conjugated antibodies: c-met, mesothelin, EpCAM, and CD45. Tumor cells were identified as mesothelin+c-met+. Tumor cell count within the ascites fluid was determined by multiplying the percentage of mesothelin+c-met+ cells by the total cell count/L.
Total RNA was isolated directly from whole blood, ascites and tumor tissue using Ribopure TM blood kits (Ambion). cDNA synthesis was performed using iScript cDNA synthesis kits (Biorad). cDNA was used in qPCR assays to detect and quantify the abundance of transgene and CD3µ transcripts, using 1 L cDNA reaction/amplification. The primer/probe set to detect transgene nucleic acid recognizes the 4-1BB-TCR junctional fragment in the signaling domain of the CAR molecule and has been described previously. To detect CD3µ transcripts, a Taqman assay (Life Technologies) was utilized. To quantify levels of T cells and transgene in samples, a 9-point standard curve was generated using cDNA synthesized from RNA isolated from each final manufactured product, with a dilution range of 10% to 0.002%. Each data-point (sample, standard curve) was evaluated in triplicate with a positive cycle threshold (Ct) value in 3 of 3 replicates with % coefficient of variance (CV) less than 20% for all quantifiable values. A parallel amplification reaction to control for the quality and quantity of interrogated cDNA was performed using a primer/probe combination specific for the housekeeping gene PP1B, and a ABI Taqman assay (Life Technologies). These amplification reactions generated a normalization factor (NF) to normalize for input cDNA across samples. The frequency of marked sample/CD3+ T cell in each sample was calculated according to the formula:  .
Whole blood was collected in red top (no additive) Vacutainer tubes (Becton Dickinson), processed to obtain serum using established laboratory SOP, aliquoted for single use and stored at 80°C. Quantification of soluble cytokine factors was performed using Luminex bead array technology and kits purchased from Life technologies. Assays were performed as per the manufacturer protocol with a 9 point standard curve generated using a 3-fold dilution series. The 2 external standard points were evaluated in duplicate and the 5 internal standards in singlet; all samples were evaluated in duplicate at 1:2 dilution; calculated %CV for the duplicate measures were less than 15%. Data were acquired on a FlexMAP-3D (Life Technologies) by percent and analyzed using XPonent 4.0 software (Life Technologies) and 5-parameter logistic regression analysis. Standard curve quantification ranges were determined by the 80120% (observed/expected value) range. Reported values included those within the standard curve range and those calculated by the logistic regression analysis.
Detailed Study design, CTL assay, Human anti-chimeric antibody (HACA) detection, Protoarray analysis, Immunoblot analysis, and PET data acquisition and analysis are in the Supplemental Methods.