Patients with or without H. pylori infection had undergone gastroscope at The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Jiangsu Province, China from March 2012 and December 2013. Samples taken from the 250 patients (150 noncancerous patients and 100 tumor patients) were collected, and were identified positive when rapid urease test was positive. These selected patients were also confirmed by 13C breath test. Noncancerous patients were classified into superficial gastritis, atrophic gastritis and dysplasia according to the pathologic classification. This protocol was approved by the Ethical Committee of the first affiliated hospital of Nanjing Medical University, and every patient had written informed consent.
SGC-7901/MKN45 gastric cancer cell lines (purchased from ATCC) were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibico) and penicillin (100 U/ml). Cells were cultured at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2.
H. pylori was inoculated into the plate and cultured at 37°C in a microaerophilic atmosphere with 5%O2, 10%CO2 and 85%N2. After 3 days, the bacterial was resuspended in RPMI-1640 medium without FBS and infected cells in a MOI of 100. Cells were then harvested after 48 h of infection.
Total RNAs were extracted from collected tissues and cell lines using Trizol (Tarkara, Japan) and then both miRNA and mRNA were reverse transcribed to cDNA. The reverse transcription was performed by using reverse transcription kit (Takara, Japan). The expression of mature miRNAs and potential target genes were measured by qRT-PCR with SYBR Green PCR Kit (Takara) on Applied Biosystems StepOne-Plus Real-Time PCR System and human U6 RNA was amplified as an internal control. The relative expression ratio of miR-204 was calculated by the 2CT method. PCR reactions were performed with the following primers: for hsa-miR-204, forward, 5-CAUCUUCCAGUACAGUGUUGGA-3 and for U6, forward, 5-CTCGCTTCGGCAGCACA-3. Relative expression levels of SOX4 mRNA were examined by SYBR Green real-time PCR (RT-PCR) and normalized to GAPDH. The primers for SOX4 were forward, 5 AGCCATCTCGGAGGAATA 3 and reverse, 5 CAGACAACCGGCCTTTAT 3; and for GAPDH, forward, 5-CGTGGGCCGCCCTAGGCACCA-3 and reverse, 5-TTGGCTTAGGGTTCAGGGGGG-3. RT-PCR was performed by using the ABI 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR system (ABI, CA, USA).
Tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and cut from paraffin block to 5 µm thickness. After dewaxing with xylene and rehydration with a graded series of ethanol, slides were heated in the autoclave for three minutes using citrate sodium buffer (PH 6.0) and incubated with the antibody SOX4 (Cell signaling Technology) at 4°C overnight. Blocking serum or antibody dilution buffer was used as negative controls. The antibodies utilized before were the same as for Western blot analysis. Photographs were taken by microsope (Nikon, ECLIPSE 50i). The number of positive staining cells showing immunoreactivity of SOX4 in ten representative microscopic fields was counted, and the percentage of positive cells was also calculated. The percentage scoring of immunoreactive tumor cells was described as follows: 0 (0%), 1 (110%), 2 (1150%), and 3 (>50%). The intensity was scored as follows: 0 (negative), 1 (weak), 2 (moderate), and 3 (strong). The expression level of SOX4 was measured by multiplying the percentage and the intensity score. High expression samples means tumors with a multiplied score exceeding 4 while the others were considered to be low expression.
Cell proliferation was examined using water-soluble tetrazolium salt assay using the Cell Counting Kit-8 (Dojindo, Kumamoto, Japan). In short, cells (1.5103/well) were seeded in 96-well culture plates in triplicate and incubated for 4 days at 37°C/5% CO2 in a humidified incubator. Viable cells were quantified at each 24 h interval by measuring OD450 using microplate reader (Epoch; BioTek, Winooski, VT).
Cells (2106) were fixed with 75% ethanol at 4°C overnight and then washed with cold PBS and treated with RNaseI, followed by staining with propidium iodide for 30 min in dark. Cell cycle analysis was then performed by flow cytometry (FACSCalibur; Becton Dickinson, Sparks, MD).
Cells were trypsinized and plated on 6-well plates (500 cells/well) and cultured for 2 weeks. The colonies were stained with 1% crystal violet for 30 min after fixation with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 minutes. The number of colonies, defined as >50 cells/colony were counted. Three independent experiments were performed. The data was calculated using paired t test.
A wound-healing assay was used to assess the ability of tumor cell motility. Briefly, cells (1*106/well) were seeded in six-well plates, cultured overnight, and transfected with miR-204 mimics or inhibitor, pcDNA-SOX4 or pcDNA-NC. On reaching confluence, the cell layer was scratched with a sterile plastic tip and then washed with culture medium twice and cultured again for up to 48 with serum-reduced medium containing 1% FBS. The gap closure was measured and the data were summarized based on sextuple assays for each experiment.
Cell invasion activity was assessed using cell culture inserts coated with basement membrane matrix (BD Biosciences, Bedford, MA) according to the manufacturer's instruction. Briefly, a total of 1105 cells in 0.2 ml serum-free RPMI-1640 medium were seeded on a Transwell apparatus. RPMI-1640 containing 10% FBS (600 µl) was added to the lower chamber. Following incubation of the cells for 24 h at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator, cells on the top surface of the insert were removed by wiping with a cotton swab. The cells that invaded to the bottom surface of the insert were fixed in the 100% pre-cooling methanol for 30 min, stained in 0.5% crystal violet for 30 min, then rinsed in PBS and subjected to microscopic inspection. Cells were counted under microscope in five random fields and the relative invasion and migration were interpreted as the average number of cells  standard deviation per field.
Total proteins were prepared and quantified using a protein assay (BCA method, Thermo, USA). Proteins were fractionated by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane, blocked in 5% dry milk at room temperature for 1 hour and immunostained with antibodies at 4°C overnight using anti-SOX4 (11000, CST, USA), anti-N-cadherin (11000, CST, USA) and anti-E-cadherin (11000, CST, USA). Anti-GAPDH (15000, sigma,USA) was used as a loading control. Results were visualized through a chemiluminescent detection system (Pierce ECL Substrate Western blot detection system, Thermo, Pittsburgh, PA) and then exposed in Molecular Imager ChemiDoc XRS System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA).
Prediction of miR-204 binding sites was performed using TargetScan software (http://www.targetscan.org). 3-UTR sequence of SOX4 which was predicted to interact with miR-204 or a mutant sequence with the predicted target sites were inserted into the KpnI and SacI sites of pGL3 promoter vector (Invitrogen). They were named pGL3-SOX4 and pGL3-SOX4-mut. The cells were plated onto 6-well plates and were transfected with 100 ng of pGL3-SOX4 or pGL3-SOX4-mut, and miR-204 mimics (50 nM) by using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen Corp, CA, USA). We normalized the differences in transfection efficiency by co-transfecting a Renilla luciferase vector pRL-SV40 (5 ng).
SOX4 gene was synthesized (purchased from Genscript, Piscataway, NJ) with restrictive digestion using Mlu I and subcloned pLV-GFP plasmid, and named pLV-GFP-SOX4. Recombinant lentivirus was generated from 293T cells using calcium phosphate precipitation. SGC-7901 cell lines were transfected with lentivirus using polybrene (8 ug/ml).
Cells were cultured in 24-well plates and transfected with 0.2 µg of either wide-type or mutant pGL-SOX4 plasmid containing firefly luciferase, together with 0.01 µg of the pGL-SOX4 vector (Invitrogen) containing renilla luciferase and 1 µg oligonucleotides. Transfection was performed using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent (Invitrogen). Relative luciferase activity was calculated 48 h post-transfection by the Dual Luciferase Reporter Assay (Promega). All transfection experiments were conducted in triplicate and repeated three times independently. Data are expressed as the mean SD.
Student's t-test or one-way analysis of variance was used for statistical analysis when appropriate. All statistical analyses were performed using the SPSS 17.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL). A two-tailed value of P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.