Fat-1 mice (C57BL/6 background) were bred in the University of Tokyo animal facility. Fat-1 mice and the WT littermates were fed a special diet (AIN-76A; Oriental Yeast Co., Ltd) containing 9.4% safflower oil with a fatty acid composition of C18:1 n-9 (825%) and C18:2 n-6 (6080%). WT littermates were always used as controls for the experiments involving fat-1 mice. In the 18-HEPE administration study, WT C57BL/6 mice were purchased at 5 wk of age from CLEA Japan Inc. and then fed the safflower oilcontaining special diet described above. After 2 wk passed, the mice were subjected to TAC operation and then subsequently fed the same special diet. The University of Tokyo Animal Committee approved all experimental procedures and protocols.
This study evaluated peripheral blood from healthy human volunteers who took high-purity EPA ethyl ester 2.7 g/day for 14 d (protocol 20130089, approved by the Ethics Committee of Keio University, Tokyo, Japan; written informed consent was obtained from all donors). Fasting venous blood (5 ml) was collected from each donor before and 2 wk after EPA administration. Plasma was separated by centrifugation, and then added to 2 ml methanol. Samples were stored at 20°C for 2 h to precipitate plasma proteins and preserved at 80°C until extraction. Upon extraction, precipitated plasma proteins were separated by centrifugation and the supernatant was used for extraction.
EPA, 18-HEPE, RvE1, and other fatty acid metabolites were obtained from Cayman Chemical. RvE2 and RvE3 were chemically synthesized as described previously.
BM cells were harvested from the femurs and tibias of 8-wk-old recipient mice. After irradiation with a lethal dose of 10 Gy, the unfractionated BM cells (106 cells) were transferred intravenously into the irradiated donor mice, which were then allowed to rest for 8 wk. Success of the BMT was confirmed by positive detection of the fat-1 transgene in peripheral blood cells from the recipient mice using PCR, and then flow cytometry to assess the frequency of GFP-positive cells among peripheral nucleated blood cells from the transgenic mice was used to determine chimeric rates after BMT.
Mice were subjected to LV pressure overload by TAC as previously described. In brief, mice were ventilated with 2% isoflurane in room air. The chest cavity was then exposed by cutting open the second left intercostal space. After isolating the aortic arch between the innominate and left common carotid arteries, it was constricted with a 70 nylon suture tied firmly three times against a 27-gauge blunted needle. Control mice were subjected to sham operations, and all animals were studied at 2, 4, and 8 wk after surgery.
Mice were anesthetized by 1.5% isoflurane inhalation, and then anchored to a positioning platform in the supine position. Short-axis echocardiographic and Doppler echocardiographic measurements were made using the Vevo 660 system (Visual Sonics) with a 600 series real-time microvisualization scanhead probe. The LV internal end-systolic and end-diastolic diameters (LVESD and LVEDD, respectively) were measured using the leading-edge convention adopted by the American Society of Echocardiography. LV fractional shortening (FS) was calculated according to the formula: FS (%) = ([LVEDD  LVESD]/LVEDD)  100. Heart rate did not differ significantly among the groups during the echocardiographic assessments.
Mice were anesthetized and sacrificed. Hearts were then immediately perfused with PBS, fixed with 10% formalin neutral buffer solution, and embedded in paraffin. After deparaffinization, the sections were incubated in 0.3% H2O2 for 15 min and blocked in 5% BSA for 30 min at room temperature. Next, the sections were incubated with antiMac-2 antibody (clone M3/38; eBioscience; 1:200) or anti-smooth muscle actin antibody (-SMA, clone 1A4; Sigma-Aldrich; 1:200) overnight at 4°C. Secondary antibodies conjugated with HRP were applied for 1 h at 4°C. Antibody binding was detected by incubating the sections in DAB substrate for 10 min at room temperature.
To evaluate the fibrotic area, short-axis sections at the mid LV level were stained with Azan and analyzed quantitatively against control reference sections using BZ-II Analyzer software (Keyence) on a BIOREVO BZ-9000 microscope (Keyence). The number of pixels with the predetermined level of blue tone were counted in each section, and then automatically converted into dimensions.
For immunofluorescence staining, the sections were incubated with anti-CD68 antibody (clone FA-11; AbD Serotec) overnight at 4°C, and then in secondary antibodies conjugated with TRITC (Dako; 1:200) for 1 h at 4°C. Nuclei were stained with Topro (Molecular Probes) in mounting medium, and the slides were observed by confocal laser-scanning microscopy (LSM510; Carl Zeiss) using appropriate emission filters.
Hearts were perfused and digested with collagenase II (Worthington Biochemical Corp). Dissociated cells were incubated with anti-CD45-conjugated microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec), followed by selective depletion of CD45+ cells using autoMACS (Miltenyi Biotec). The remaining CD45- cells were resuspended in DMEM (Life Technologies) containing 10% fetal bovine serum and placed on Primaria culture dishes (BD). After 2 h, the culture medium was changed to remove any myocytes and endothelial cells still weakly attached to the dish. After 24 h, the culture medium was changed again, and the fibroblast cultures were grown to 85% confluence, at which point the medium was replaced with DMEM containing 0.1% FBS (serum-reduced medium). After a further 24 h, the isolated fibroblasts were cultured with co-cultured macrophages and macrophage-conditioned medium with or without 18-HEPE (Cayman Chemical).
Macrophages were isolated from peritoneal lavage by using anti-CD11b microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec) on autoMACS (Miltenyi Biotec). Adult murine cardiac fibroblasts (5  105 cells/well) were co-cultured with CD11b+ peritoneal macrophages (5  105 cells/well) on 24-well plates using Transwell inserts (Corning) with a 0.4-µm porous membrane or with conditioned medium harvested from the 24-h CD11b+ macrophage cultures. After incubation for 48 h, the supernatants and the cultured cells on the lower dish were harvested, and ELISA was used to determine IL-6 concentrations in the supernatants, according to the manufacturers instructions (R&D Systems).
Total RNA was extracted by acid guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction with ISOGEN reagent (Nippon Gene). Reverse transcription was performed using the Prime Script RT reagent kit (Takara) in accordance with the manufacturers protocol. Real-time PCR was performed using the SYBR Premix Ex Taq kit (Takara) in an ABI Prism 7500 sequence detection system (Applied Biosystems). The obtained data were normalized against the expression levels of mouse 18S recombinant RNA. The sequences of primer pairs were designed using Primer3 plus and are described in Table S1.
Hearts were perfused with PBS and digested with collagenase. The infiltrated leukocytes in the digested supernatants were blocked with anti-mouse CD16/32 antibody (2.4G2; BD) for 5 min and then stained with antibodies to either FITC-conjugated antimouse CD45 (30-F11; eBioscience), PE-conjugated antimouse Gr-1 (RB68C5; BD), APC-conjugated antimouse F4/80 (BM8; eBioscience), or Pacific Blueconjugated antimouse CD11b (M1/70; BioLegend) for 20 min. Cells were analyzed for composition using FACS Aria 2 (BD) with data analyzed by Flow Jo (Tree Star Inc.).
Lipids were extracted by the method of Bligh and Dyer. Isolated phospholipids were methylated with 2.5% H2SO4 in methanol, and then the fatty acid methyl esters were extracted with hexane and subjected to gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) analysis. GC-MS analysis was performed by using an Agilent 7890A-5975C GC-MS network system (Agilent Technologies) equipped with a DB-23 capillary column (60 m  250 µm  0.15 µm; Agilent Technologies). The oven temperature program was as follows: an initial temperature of 50°C held for 1 min was raised to 175°C at 25°C/min, and then to 235°C at 5°C/min, and held for 5 min. The injector and detector temperatures were both set at 250°C.
LC-MS/MSbased lipidomics analyses were performed using a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Waters UPLC) with a linear ion-trap quadrupole mass spectrometer (QTRAP5500; AB SCIEX) equipped with an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 column (Waters) as described previously. MS/MS analyses were conducted in negative-ion mode, and fatty acid metabolites were identified and quantified by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM).
Values are presented as mean  SEM. Comparisons between groups were made using a Mann-Whitney U test, whereas data among multiple groups were compared using the Kruskal-Wallis test with Bonferroni post-hoc testing. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS 22.0 for Windows (SPSS, Inc.).