Human CD14+ monocytes were purified from whole blood cell preparations from healthy donors as previously described  and differentiated into macrophages for 12 days in 10ng/mL MCSF (Peprotech) and RPMI (Gibco) supplemented with 10% defined HBS (Hyclone). Cells were stimulated with 20ng/mL recombinant human TNF and either 20pg/mL or 200pg/mL human IFN- (Peprotech) for mRNA and protein analyses, respectively. Infliximab (Janssen Biotech), human IgG (Sigma), human IL10/ IL10R (R&D Systems) and human gp130 (R&D Systems) antibodies were added at 5ug/mL.
Human synovial fibroblasts derived from deidentified synovial tissues of RA or osteoarthritis (OA) patients undergoing total joint arthroplasty (protocol approved by Institutional Review Board at the Hospital for Special Surgery) were digested and passaged as previously described. The diagnoses of RA was based on the American College of Rheumatology criteria.
For co-culture experiments, in vitro differentiated macrophages were replated directly onto adherent synovial fibroblasts, with the fibroblast:macrophage ratio at 1:2.5, respectively. For transwell culture experiments, synovial fibroblasts adhered to polyester chambers with 0.4um pores (Corning) were suspended above the wells containing macrophages. Supernatants collected from synovial fibroblasts cultured with or without TNF for 16 hours were added to macrophage cultures (0.8mL supernatant into 1.2mL standard culture media). Synovial fibroblast supernatants were fractionated by Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filters (50, 30, 10 and 3kD membranes).
RNA obtained using RNAeasy kit (Qiagen) with DNAse treatment was reverse transcribed into cDNA (Fermentas) and analyzed by real-time quantitative PCR (Fast SYBR Green, Applied Biosystems) on a 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems). Gene-specific primer sequences for CXCL9, CXCL10, IFN, Interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 gene (IFIT1), Interferon-induced GTP-binding protein Mx1 gene (MX1), GAPDH, CXCL5 and IL1B were as described, while the primers for the Natural Killer Cell Granule Protein 7 gene (NKG7) consisted of the following sequences [F:GATCCAGACCTTCTTCTCCT, R:ACAACGCTCAAAACTCATCT]. Expression levels were normalized to GAPDH and either calculated relative to the uninduced macrophage monoculture sample or as a percentage of the TNF- or IFN-induced macrophage monoculture sample.
Western blot analyses were performed using standard procedures with the additional step of adding Pefabloc (Sigma) to macrophage cultures before cell lysis to prevent STAT protein degradation. Antibodies used for Western blots include phospho-STAT1 (Y701) (Cell Signalling, #9171), phospo-STAT2 (Y689) (Millipore, #07-224), STAT1 (Santa Cruz, #sc-346), STAT2 (BD, #610188) and p38 (Santa Cruz, sc-535).
Total RNA was first extracted using RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen). Tru-seq sample preparation kits (Illumina) were then used to purify poly-A transcripts and generate libraries with multiplexed barcode adaptors. All samples passed quality control analysis on a Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent). Paired-end reads (50 x 2 cycles, ~75x106 reads per sample) were obtained on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 in the Weill Cornell Medical College Genomics Resources Core Facility. The TopHat program was used to align the reads to the UCSC Hg19 human reference genome, while the Cufflinks program allowed for measurements of transcript abundance (represented by Fragments Per Kilobase of exon model per Million mapped reads (FPKM)). The RNAseq data have been deposited into the GEO Database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) and assigned accession number GSE57723.
The Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) program (Ingenuity Systems, www.ingenuity.com) was used to analyze the genes in TNF-induced macrophages that were differentially regulated by fibroblasts more than 2-fold. The Upstream Regulator analytic was used to predict upstream regulators whose change in expression or function could explain the observed gene expression changes. The p-value relates to the extent of overlap between known target genes for an upstream regulator and genes differentially regulated in the current dataset. The upstream regulators listed in our results were limited to proteins and endogenous small molecules. A z-score of higher absolute value suggests the majority of target genes for that upstream regulator were altered in a direction consistent with either inhibition or activation of the upstream regulator (an absolute value of 2 or higher is considered significant), for which a negative or positive value represents the predicted inhibition or activation of the upstream regulator, respectively. Target gene networks for the predicted Upstream Regulators MYC and epidermal growth factor (EGF) were limited to target genes that were differentially regulated by at least 4-fold and whose expression change was in the direction that is consistent with the prediction of the upstream regulator as either activated or inhibited. For purposes of clarity, the display of networks in Figure 6D was modified from the IPA standard design as follows: 1) target gene color: red indicates increased expression while green indicates decreased expression in the current experimental data set; 2) lines: lines with arrow heads indicate that the upstream regulator (MYC or EGF) is known from prior published findings to induce gene expression of the target whereas lines without arrow heads indicate that the upstream regulator is known to repress gene expression; 3) target gene shapes represent the molecular classification or function of the protein encoded by the gene, as described in the figure legend.
A paired two-tailed students t-test was used to analyze for statistical significance. P values < 0.05 were considered significant.