Tissue samples were collected from patients with colon cancer who underwent operation in the Department of General Surgery at the Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical University from July 2005 to December 2010. Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue specimens from 127 patients diagnosed with colon cancer were included. All the patients received fluorouracil-based adjuvant chemotherapy after surgical resection. Clinical and pathological classification and staging were determined according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer criteria. Patients were observed until death or December 2012, whichever came first. Patients were followed up for the median of 35.3 months (ranged, 3.558.8 months). The study protocol was approved by the ethics committee of our hospital. Written informed consent was obtained from each participant before data collection.
The cancer tissues were fixed, paraffin-embedded, and cut to 5m thick sections for immunohistochemistry. Briefly, the slides were incubated with SIRT3 and CD31 primary antibodies (both 1:200, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA). The immunoreactive products were visualized by the catalysis of 3,3-diaminobenzidine. SIRT3 protein expression was evaluated using the immunoreactive-score (IRS) system (combining positive cell ratio and staining intensity). An IRS score of ¥6 was used to define tumors as the high expression of SIRT3, and an IRS score of <6 was used to indicate the low SIRT3 expression.
Two human colon carcinoma cell lines, SW480 and DLD-1 cells, were cultured in MEM, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic solution at 37°C in a humid incubator with 5% CO2. Nonspecific control siRNA or SIRT3 siRNA (sequence: CAT CCC TAC ATG CAG ATG AAA) was transfected for 48 hours using siLentFect Lipid Reagent (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Total RNA (1g) was reversely transcribed by QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) from cells after siRNA transfection and cDNA was synthesized. Quantitative RT-PCR was carried out using the FastStart Universal SYBR Green Master (Roche) on an Applied Biosystems ABI 7900 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The oligonucleotide primers for human SIRT3 and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) were as follows: SIRT3-F 5-ACCCAGTGGCATTCCAGAC-3; SIRT3-R 5-GGCTTGGGGTTGTGAAAGAAG-3; GAPDH-F 5-GAGTCAACGGATTTGGTCGT-3; GAPDH-R 5-GACAAGCTTCCCGTTCTCAG-3. The gene expression level was normalized using GAPDH as an internal reference gene, and the average relative change was calculated using 35 determinations by relative quantification, applying the delta-delta cycle threshold method.
The cancer receiving after siRNA transfection was lysed for western blot assay. After immunoblot analysis, membranes were immunoblotted with anti-SIRT3, antihypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF1), antivascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A), and anti-GAPDH (all at 1:1000 dilution, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA). Membranes were then washed and incubated with a secondary antibody coupled to horseradish peroxidase.
Cellular proliferation was analyzed after siRNA transfection using a WST-8 Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) (Beyotime, Nantong, China). 3  103 cells were seeded in 96-well plates and incubated for 24h. 10L CCK-8 solution was added to each well and the cultures were incubated at 37°C for 1h. Absorbance at 450nm was measured on an ELX-800 spectrometer reader (Bio-Tek Instruments, Winooski, USA). This assay was repeated 3 times.
After siRNA transfection, cell migration was determined by using a modified two-chamber migration assay with a pore size of 8m. For the migration assay, 1  105 cells were seeded on the upper compartment of 24-well Transwell culture chamber. After 24-hour incubation, nontraversed cells were removed from the upper surface of the filter carefully with a cotton swab. Traversed cells on the lower side of the filter were stained with crystal violet and then counted. This assay was repeated 3 times.
The invasion assay was performed using a modified two-chamber plates. 30L of 50mg/mL Matrigel (BD Biosciences, Mississauga, Canada) in serum-free medium was added to the upper compartment of 24-well Transwell culture chamber. 1  105 cells suspended in 200L of serum-free medium were seeded on the upper compartment, and 600L of complete medium was added to the lower compartment. After 24-hour incubation at 37°C, cells were fixed with methanol. Noninvaded cells were removed from the upper surface of the filter carefully with a cotton swab. Invaded cells on the lower side of the filter were stained with crystal violet and counted afterwards. This assay was repeated 3 times.
To detect the intracellular ROS production in cancer cells, 1  104 cells were seeded in chamber wells and cultured for 24 hours to reach >80% confluence. Then CM-H2DCFDA (10¬mol/L, Molecular Probes, USA) was added to chamber wells for 30 minutes. The nuclei were counterstained with 4,6-diamino-2-phenylindole (DAPI).
To induce apoptosis, the cultured cells received serum starvation for 48 hours. The in situ DeadEndTM Colorimetric Apoptosis Detection System (Promega, Madison, WI) was used according to the manufacturer's instructions. Sample slides were washed in PBS and then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde solution. Sections were incubated with terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase enzyme in a humidified chamber at 37°C for 60 min. The reaction was terminated by transferring the slides to 2 sodium citrate saline solution. The sections were counterstained with DAPI. For quantitative analysis, 5 fields per section were selected. Apoptosis was indexed by counting TUNEL positive cells per 100 nuclei per section.
A two-sided Fisher exact test or Ï 2 test was performed to analyze the potential association between SIRT3 expression and clinical parameters. The cumulative survival time was computed using the Kaplan-Meier method and compared by the log-rank test. Colon cancer-specific survival was defined from colon cancer diagnosis to time of death, which was related to colon cancer or censored on the last known alive date, or death due to other causes. Overall survival (OS) is defined as the time between study registration and a patient's death. Univariate and multivariate analyses were based on the Cox proportional hazards regression model. To evaluate the amount of protein expression, the Raytest TINA software (http://www.raytest.de/service/raytest_catalog.html) was used for the densitometric analysis in the western blot assay as described previously. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Analyses were performed using the statistical software package SAS 9.32 (SAS Inc., USA).