A total of 68 ethnically Han Chinese patients were enrolled from several medical centers in Taiwan through a national project for revealing risk factors and natural history of gastric MALT lymphoma. All cases had been histopathologically confirmed. The control group comprised 140 unrelated individuals randomly selected from a health checkup program, who had no evidence of malignant diseases, autoimmune disorders or any other major illness. All participants voluntarily consented to participate in this study. The Department of Health, Executive Yuan, Taiwan, the Taiwan Cooperative Oncology Group for gastric MALT lymphoma and the institutional research board of National Taiwan University Hospital approved the study protocol (NTUH-9561703044).
H. pylori infection was screened serologically using a standard enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and confirmed by histologic examination, biopsy urease test, urea breath test or bacterial culture. All patients positive for H. pylori received eradication therapy as the first-line treatment, and then underwent intensive endoscopic follow-up with biopsy to evaluate the response of lymphoma to successful H. pylori eradication. Tumors that resolved to Wotherspoon's score of ©½2 after successful H. pylori eradication therapy were considered as complete histologic remission. Systemic chemotherapy was administered to those with grossly stable or progressive disease during the follow-up course.
We started from a casecontrol study with a two-step systemic approach to unravel genetic association with gastric MALT lymphoma. The first step was to screen 18 genes encoding cytokines and cytokine receptors that play important roles in T cell-mediated inflammatory responses in gastrointestinal mucosa (IL-12B, IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-17RA, IL-21, IL-21R, IL-22, IL-23A and IL-23R), or chemokines and chemokine receptors that regulate the recruitment of inflammatory cells to sites of infection in gastrointestinal mucosa (CCR6, CX3CR1, CXCR3, CXCR5, CCL20, CX3CL1, CXCL9, CXCL10 and CXCL13). Information of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in each gene was collected from the HapMap database (http://hapmap.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). For genotyping, we selected a total of 84 SNPs that are located within the coding region, the 3 and 5 untranslated regions or 1kb 3 and 5 flanking regions (Supplementary Appendix I and II). In the first step, we uncovered a significant association with polymorphisms in IL-22. To further delineate the association, we performed the second step of genotyping focusing on IL-22. The IL-22 SNPs selected for additional genotyping analysis were those with a minor allele frequency of >0.05 in the Han Chinese population and were located within the exons, 3 and 5 flanking regions and intron 1. Totally, 35 IL-22 SNPs were genotyped.
Genomic DNA was isolated from cryopreserved leukocytes by proteinase K digestion followed by phenolchloroform extraction. Genotyping was performed by using the iPLEX assay and Sequenom matrix-associated laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry according to the manufacturer's instructions (Sequenom, San Diego, CA). Briefly, we utilized the SpectroDESIGNER software (Sequenom) to design primers and probes for performing multiplex PCR. Single base primer extension was performed after deactivation of the remaining nucleotides by shrimp alkaline phosphatase. The products of primer extension were spotted on a 384-element silicon chip (SpectroCHIP, Sequenom) and assayed using the matrix-associated laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight SpectroREADER mass spectrometer (Sequenom).
AGS cells (human gastric adenocarcinoma epithelial cell line) were maintained in RPMI-1640 medium (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Hyclone, Logan, UT, USA) and 2mM L-glutamine at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2.
The H. pylori clinical isolate (NTUHC1) was obtained from the National Taiwan University Hospital and was grown on CDC anaerobe 5% sheep blood agar (BBL, Becton-Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) at 37°C under microaerophilic condition. After overnight culture, H. pylori cells were harvested, washed once and resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline. The bacteria were then diluted with cell culture medium for co-culture experiments.
Elutriated leukocytes or buffy coats were collected from healthy donors at the Taipei Blood Center (Taipei, Taiwan). The leukocytes were diluted fivefold with phosphate-buffered saline, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were purified by Ficoll-Hypaque Plus (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Piscataway, NJ, USA) gradient centrifugation. PBMCs were cultured in complete RPMI-1640 overnight and washed three times with complete RPMI-1640 (without penicillin/streptomycin), then resuspended in complete RPMI-1640 at a concentration of 5  105 cells/ml, and co-cultured with H. pylori at a multiplicity of infection of 30. After 48h of co-culture, the culture supernatants were collected and assayed for IL-22 by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA). The peripheral blood T cells were further isolated from PBMCs using an AutoMACS magnetic cell sorter (Miltenyl, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, PBMCs were resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline buffer containing 2% fetal bovine serum followed by the incubation with 2% mouse serum for 20min at 4°C to block Fc receptors. The cells were then incubated with anti-CD4 conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate (eBioscience, San Diego, CA, USA) or anti-CD8 antibody conjugated with phycoerythrin (eBioscience) for the purification of peripheral CD4+ T cells and CD8+ T cells, respectively. After 20-min of incubation at 4°C, cells were washed twice with 2% fetal bovine serum/phosphate-buffered saline. The cells were then resuspended in MACS buffer at 108 cells/ml followed by incubation with anti-fluorescein isothiocyanate beads for the isolation of CD4+ T cells or with anti-phycoerythrin beads for the isolation of CD8+ T cells. After 15min of incubation at 4°C, cells were washed once and subjected to autoMACS separation for the isolation of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. The isolated CD4+ or CD8+ T cells (5  105 cells/ml) were co-cultured with H. pylori in the presence of antigen-presenting cells, and the culture supernatants were collected for measuring IL-22 levels by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
AGS cells were seeded in 6-cm dishes and cultured in the absence or presence of IL-22 (20ng/ml; R&D Systems) for 0, 6, 12, or 24h before being harvested. Total RNAs were extracted using the Trizol reagent followed by first-strand complementary DNA synthesis (Invitrogen). The complementary DNA was mixed with Maxima SYBR Green qPCR Master Mix (Fermentas, Lithuania, Canada) and specific primer pairs. The mixture was subjected to SYBR real-time PCR using Applied Biosystems 7500 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The PCR conditions were 50°C for 2min, 95°C for 10min, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 15s and 60°C for 1min. The resultant PCR products were analyzed by ABI 7500 software (Applied Biosystems). The Ct method was used to quantify the levels of gene expression. The primers for genes were as follows: -actin, forward: 5-TGGACTTCGAGCAAG AGATG-3, reverse: 5-TTGCTGATCCACATCTGCTG-3 lipocalin-2, forward: 5-AAGACAAAGACCCGCAAAAGATG-3, reverse: 5-GTCCTGATCCAGTAGTCACACTTC-3, RegIII, forward: 5-CAGGGCACCGAGCCCAATGGAG-3, reverse: 5-TCTCTCCCATGCAAAGTAAT-3.
Immunohistochemical staining of IL-22 in gastric tissue was performed in all (n=41) patients who had available pretreatment histological specimens. Paraffin blocks containing the specimens were cut into 5m sections. The first section was routinely stained with hematoxylin and eosin for histology, and sequential sections were immunohistochemically stained for IL-22 with a standard avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex detection system. Endogenous peroxidase activity and nonspecific bindings were blocked by incubation with 3% hydrogen peroxide and non-immune goat serum, respectively. The sections were then incubated with goat anti-human IL-22 (dilution 1:50; R&D Systems) overnight at 4°C, with a biotinylated mouse anti-goat secondary antibody for 30min, and with peroxidase-conjugated streptavidin for 10min. Finally, the sections were counterstained with Mayer's hematoxylin.
To investigate the genetic association between cases and controls, all statistical analyses were performed using the SAS/Genetics program (version 9.1, SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA). The association between genotypes and disease status were tested by CochraneArmitage trend test. To compensate accurately for testing this model, significance was also estimated against the empirical distribution of the statistic after performing 10000 permutations of the case and control labels for each marker.
We also applied logistic regression models to test for the genotypephenotype correlations. Odds ratio with 95% confidence interval for each genotype associated with gastric MALT lymphoma was determined. There were five significant SNPs of IL-22. Of these, four had very similar minor allele frequencies and odds ratios. In order to evaluate whether these four significant SNPs were located in same linkage disequilibrium block, this study assessed pairwise linkage disequilibrium structure among these SNPs by Haploview software (version 4.1) (Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA). Furthermore, we used SAS/HAPLOTYPE procedure to test association between disease status and this haplotype block.