This study was conducted according to the principles expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki. The Institutional Review Boards of the following medical centers, which provided human islets, each provided approval for the collection of samples and subsequent analysis: University of Geneva School of Medicine; San Raffaele Hospital, Milan; Faculty of Medicine, Lille 2 University; Massachusetts General Hospital; Washington University; University of Pennsylvania; Scharp/Lacy Institute; University of Illinois; University of Wisconsin; University of Miami; Southern California Islet Consortium. All donors provided written informed consent for the collection of all samples and subsequent analysis.
Human Islets were received 26 days following isolation. Islets from individual donors (Table 1) were dissociated into single cells and cultured in CMRL 1066 medium containing 5.6 mmol/liter glucose and supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 units/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, 100 µg/ml gentamycin, and 5 µg/ml amphotericin B as described. The cultures were refed twice a week and split 12 once a week. Lineage tracing was performed using the RIP-Cre/ER and pTriploxP-NEO-STOP-loxP-eGFP lentiviral vectors as described. 4-hydroxytamoxifen (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to a final concentration of 1 µM one day post-infection. Following overnight incubation the medium was changed to regular growth medium. Labeled cells were sorted using a FACS Aria sorter (BD Biosciences) as described.
-catenin shRNAs (accession numbers TRCN-3843, -3844,-3845,-3846 and -10824) and a non-target shRNA cloned in plko.1-PURO lentiviral vector were obtained from the RNAi Consortium (Sigma-Aldrich). Virus was produced in 293T cells as described. Cells were infected at MOI 21 in CMRL 1066 medium containing 8 µg/ml polybrene overnight. The medium was then replaced with culture medium. Four days following infection the cells were selected with 1 µg/ml puromycin for 3 days. All shRNAs were evaluated for -catenin inhibition in HeLa cells before use in expanded islet cells.
Expanded human islet cells or sorted BCD cells in passages 57 were infected with -catenin shRNA or nontarget shRNA viruses. Five to 6 days following infection cells were trypsinized, pelleted, and seeded at 3.8104 cells/cm2 in ultra-low attachment plates (Corning) in CMRL 1066 medium containing 5.6 mM glucose and supplemented with 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, 100 µg/ml gentamycin sulphate (Biological Industries), 1% BSA fraction V (Sigma), 1 insulin/transferrin/selenium (ITS, Invitrogen), D-Glucose (final concentration 25 mM), 8 nM exendin-4 (Acris), 8 nM activin A (Cytolab/PreproTech), 1 B27 supplement (Stem Cell Technologies), and 10 mM nicotinamide (Sigma) (Redifferentiation Cocktail, RC) for the indicated periods. Half-volume medium changes were performed every other day.
Total RNA was extracted using the High Pure RNA isolation kit (Roche), or with ZR RNA MiniPrep RNA Isolation Kit (Zymo), and treated with RNase-free DNase1 (Thermo), or with TRI©Reagent (Sigma) followed by treatment with DNA-Free (Ambion). cDNA was produced using SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen) or High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems). qPCR was carried out in triplicates using the Universal Probe Library System (Roche) in 7300 Real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems). Results were normalized to the TATA-box-binding protein (TBP) or Ribosomal protein large P0 (RPLP0) transcripts. These genes were selected as normalization controls since their detection threshold occurred at the same cycle in all the samples studied. Data analysis was performed with qBase software. Table 2 lists primer sequences. All reactions were performed with annealing at 60°C for 40 cycles. For undetectable transcripts, the cycle number was set to 40 for comparisons.
Cells were spotted on slides using Shandon Cytospin4 centrifuge (Thermo Scientific), and fixed for 15 minutes at room temperature in 4% paraformaldehyde. For nuclear antigens, cells were incubated in 0.25% NP40 for 10 minutes at room temperature prior to blocking. Samples were blocked for 15 min at room temperature in blocking buffer (1% BSA, 10% fetal goat serum, and 0.2% saponin) and incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer as follows: mouse anti--catenin (1200, Cell Signaling); mouse anti-active -catenin (1500, Millipore); rat anti-human C-peptide (11000, Beta Cell Biology Consortium); rabbit anti-eGFP (11000, Invitrogen); rabbit anti-Ki67 (1200, Zymed); mouse anti-Ki67 (1200, Zymed); and mouse anti- human PDX1 (1500, R & D Systems). Slides were washed in blocking buffer 5 times, and incubated with a secondary antibody conjugated to Alexa fluorophores (11000, all from Invitrogen,). DNA was stained with DAPI. The slides were mounted with Fluorescent Mounting Medium (GBI Labs). Images were visualized under a fluorescent BX61 microscope or TCS SP5 confocal fluorescent microscope. To demonstrate antibody specificity, a minus-primary antibody control was employed.
Cellular protein was extracted for 10 min in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.4, containing 0.5% NP-40, 0.7% NaCl, 0.2% EDTA, and protease inhibitors. Samples of 2040 µg protein were resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred to Immobilon-P Membrane (Millipore). Non-specific sites were blocked for one hour at room temperature in blocking buffer containing 5% skim milk in TTBS buffer. The membrane was then incubated with rabbit anti--catenin (110000, Abcam), mouse anti-SNAI2 (1200, Abgent), rabbit anti-FOXO1 (11000, Cell Signaling), or rabbit anti-phospho FOXO1 (11000, Cell Signaling). The bound antibody was visualized with appropriate horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-IgG (Jackson) and SuperSignal West Chemiluminescent Substrate kit (Pierce). Signal intensity was quantitated using TINA software.
TUNEL assay was performed using In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit (Roche), according to the manufacturer's protocol. The fluorescence was visualized under a fluorescent BX61 microscope.
Total RNA was isolated as above. Hybridization to Affymetrix GeneChip Human Gene 1.0 ST Arrays, washing, and scanning were performed according to the manufacturer. Microarray analysis was performed on CEL files using Partek Genomics Suite TM (Partek). Data were normalized with the multi-average method. Batch effect removal was applied for the different samples, followed by one-way ANOVA. Clustering analysis was performed by Partek Genomics Suite software with Pearson's dissimilarity correlation by average linkage methods. The raw data has been deposited in the GEO database (accession number GSE60803).
Significance was determined using Student's t test. To approach a normal distribution of the qPCR data, a logarithmic transformation was performed. To account for multiple testing, the Bonferroni correction was applied.