The EBV LMP1-targeted DNAzyme tested was produced by Oligos Etc, Inc. (Wilsonville, OR, USA) under Good Manufacturing Practice conditions. The efficacy, toxicity, and plasma pharmacokinetics of this LMP1-targeted DNAzyme was previously evaluated in mice prior to clinical study. Based on the results of these studies, this LMP1-targeted DNAzyme was found to be safe and well-tolerated.
A total of 24 patients with histologically confirmed NPC were enrolled in this study and received treatment at the Xiangya Hospital. This cohort included 18 males and 6 females who ranged in age from 3164 years (Table 1). Poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma was confirmed by biopsy in all 24 cases, while EBV-LMP1 positive expression was confirmed with immunohistochemical techniques. In addition, 17 cases involved cervical lymph node metastasis, while distant metastases were not detected in any of the cases.
Twenty-four patients were randomly and double-blindly divided into two groups: a combined treatment group (n = 14) or a radiotherapy alone group (n =10) (Table 1). The randomization of patients was not ideal since six patients (1 in the combined treatment group and 5 in the radiotherapy alone group) rejected DCE-MRI. For both treatment groups, a Varian 2100C/D linear accelerator was used for radiotherapy.
The combined treatment group received radiotherapy plus an injection of the LMP1-targeted DNAzyme in saline (6 mg/0.1 ml) into each tumor. Regarding the latter, patients received local anesthesia and an epical endoscope was used to guide the injections. The injections were performed twice a week for five weeks, resulting in a total volume of 1 ml LMP1-targeted DNAzyme administered to each tumor. For radiotherapy, a 2 Gy dose was administered five times a week for seven weeks, resulting in a total dose of 70 Gy.
For the radiotherapy alone group, the program and dose of radiotherapy were the same as that described for the combined treatment group. In addition, the patients received local anesthesia for injections of saline (0.1 ml each) that were administered using an epical endoscope. Injections were performed twice a week for five weeks, resulting in a total volume of 1 ml saline administered to each tumor.
This study was conducted in accordance with the International Conference on Harmonization-Good Clinical Practice. Approval for this study was obtained from the Human Ethics Committee of the Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, and written consent was obtained from each participant. Approval was also obtained from the Ministry of Science and Technology.
All patients underwent conventional MRI and DCE-MRI scans 1~2 days prior to the start of radiotherapy (Pre-RT). Subsequent scans were performed during the radiotherapy treatment period after a radiation dose of 50 Gy had been achieved (RT 50 Gy), at the end of radiotherapy when a total radiation dose of 70 Gy had been applied (RT 70 Gy), and three months after radiotherapy (3 months post-RT). MRI was performed using a 1.5 T system (MAGNETOM Sonata, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany).
Unenhanced axial T1-weighted (repetition time/echo time [TR/TE] 450/10 ms, field of view [FOV] 230230 mm, section thickness 5 mm, intersection gap 1.5 mm, 19 sections) and axial T2-weighted (TR/TE 4200/98 ms) images were obtained. Contrast-enhanced and fat-suppression T1-weighted images (TR/TE 450/10) were obtained following the DCE-MRI scans.
DCE-MRI was acquired using a TurboFLASH sequence before, during, and after an intravenous injection of CA was made. Ten axial sections were selected from throughout the tumor on the basis of T2-weighted imaging. Parameters were as follows: TR/TE 199 ms/1.05 ms, inverse time 100 ms, FOV 260 mm210 mm, matrix 12896, flip angle 20°, section thickness 6 mm, intersection gap 1.2 mm, time resolution 4 s. A series of 90 multisection sets were acquired in 360 s. At the end of the sixth acquisition, a standard dose (0.2 mmol/kg body weight) bolus of CA (Magnevist, Bayer Schering Pharma AG, Berlin, Germany) was injected via the antecubital vein at a rate of 4 ml/s using a CA power injector (OptiStarTM LE, Mallinckrodt), followed by a 20 ml bolus of saline at a rate of 4 ml/s.
The original DCE-MRI data were transferred to an independent workstation and processed using a nordicICE software package (Nordic Image Control and Evaluation Version 2.3.6; Nordic Imaging Lab, Bergen, Norway). First, the arterial input function (AIF) was automatically obtained from a region of interest (ROI) drawn on the internal carotid artery located in close proximity to the tumor. Secondly, based on Tofts-kermode two compartment kinetic modeling theory, deconvolution of the tissue response curves (dynamic curves for all pixels) was performed using the AIF according to Keunen. Qualitative, as well as quantitative, maps of several parameters (including Ktrans, kep, ve) related to vascular permeability and intra- and extravascular volumes were subsequently obtained. To calculate the Ktrans for each tumor, a ROI (with a diameter of 9-10 pixels, or 60-70 mm2) was placed on the tumor parenchyma where the Ktrans value was the highest. For the same ROI, the other parameters were calculated. Ktrans represents the rate constant for the transfer of CA from plasma to the extravascular extracellular space (EES). In addition, kep is the rate constant for the transfer of CA from EES to plasma, and ve is the CA distribution volume. These parameters are related as follows: ve=(Ktrans/kep).
Adverse events were reviewed at each patient visit. Blood samples were also collected from patients prior to radiotherapy, during radiotherapy (after 50 Gy), and three months after radiotherapy. Analyses of blood chemistry, as well as liver and renal function, were evaluated. Impairment of the skin, mucous membranes, and salivary gland are common characteristics of radiation therapy, and their incidence was analyzed using the Wilcoxon rank sum test.
All data are expressed as the meanstandard deviation (SD), and confidence intervals are included in the figures. Using Students t-test, values between the different groups were compared. In addition, the values at various timepoints were compared for the same group using the Student-Newman-Keuls (SNK)-q test. A P-value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS (version 17.0; SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).