The BT474 cell line (from the Gray Lab) was used for proof of principle experiments. Cells were grown in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) medium supplemented with 10 % FBS and 1 % antibiotics/antimycotics (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). BT474 cells were trypsinized for 5 min and counted using a hemocytometer. Cell count was confirmed with a FACS Calibur using our previously described multi-marker FACS assay. 1000100,000 cells were spiked into 10 mL PB obtained from healthy females; all specimens were processed immediately, and over-exposure to trypsin was avoided by quenching with medium.
Ten to 20 mL of PB was drawn into EDTA tubes from five female MBC patients yielding 9-993 captured CTCs from which expression profiles were obtained; specimens were processed immediately by IE/FACS. Microarray data for primary tumors prior to neoadjuvant chemotherapy were obtained from the I-SPY1 trial (CALGB 150012, ACRIN 6657). Normal breast (n = 1) and skin samples (n = 3) were collected as core and punch biopsies. Negative control PB samples were obtained from healthy individuals. All patients gave informed consent under a protocol approved by the University of California San Francisco Institutional Review Board. All patients received standard of care therapy for MBC; all patients had been previously treated with several courses of chemotherapy, and samples were obtained at convenient time points in patient care during routine outpatient laboratory PB draws. We selected patients known to be CTC positive for this pilot study based on prior positive CTC test results.
IE/FACS was performed as previously described but with an emphasis on the preservation of RNA to be isolated directly from CTCs. As we previously described in Magbanua et al., our IE/FACS assays involve immunomagnetic separation using EpCAM (MJ37) mAb-coated magnetic beads followed by FACS with EpCAM (EBA-1) mAb conjugated to phycoerythrin (PE), thioflavin nucleic acid dye, and CD45 (2D1) mAb conjugated to Cy5-PerCP (all from BD Biosciences, San Jose CA). A threshold of a single cell meeting these criteria was qualified as a positive test result. We prepared the FACS Aria II (BD Biosciences) with RNAse Zap decontamination solution (Ambion, Austin, TX) prior to all sorting. All samples were processed immediately following blood draws, and all lysates were immediately placed on ice. All CTC subjects specimens were analyzed with a FACS Aria processed using consistent gates.
All sorted samples were stored at 80 째C as cell lysates until the time of RNA isolation with PicoPure RNA isolation kits (Life Technologies). For normal PB, RNA was extracted using the Qiagen Blood RNA kit (Qiagen). Total RNA and equivalent amounts of StratRef (Stratagene Universal Human Pooled Reference RNA, Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) were treated with 200 ng of poly dIdC (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). CTC, BT474, PB, and StratRef samples were linearly amplified with 2 rounds using Arcturus RiboAmpHS (Life Technologies). Primary tumor, normal epithelium, and StratRef were amplified using 2 round modified T7 amplification. Concentrations of amplified RNA products were measured using a UV spectrophotometer. The molecular weight and integrity of amplified RNA species were evaluated using the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA).
BT474 and StratRef total RNA were converted to cDNA using M-MLV reverse transcriptase and random hexamers (Life Technologies). Samples were then incubated at 25 째C for 10 min then 48 째C for 30 min. Expression levels of 37 genes and a housekeeping gene GUS (beta-glucuronidase) were analyzed using a 5 nuclease assay and TaqMan Gene Expression Assays with an ABI PRISM 7700 instrument (Applied Biosystems (ABI), Foster City, CA). Relative expression levels were calculated relative to GUS. Calculated QPCR expression ratios were derived using the formula relative expression = 2( CT). Log-transformed (base 2) values for each gene expression ratio were plotted for both microarray and QPCR methods. We have previously published details regarding the selection strategy and gene list. Subsequent validation of our assay performance was performed by QPCR of spiked, sorted BT474 and PB for EpCAM, ER, HER2, CD45, HLA, and GAPDH using TaqMan assays.
The 20,862 human cDNAs used in these studies were purchased from Research Genetics (Huntsville, AL), now Invitrogen, and were provided by the Haqq laboratory as cDNA microarrays. On the basis of Unigene build 166, these clones represent 19,740 independent loci. Hybridization, washing, scanning, and primary data analysis were performed as previously described. Slides were then washed, scanned, and analyzed with Axon Imager 4000b (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA), using GENEPIXPRO3.0.
cDNA microarray data included three different array formats, containing 21,600 (set 1), 21,632 (set 2), and 41,664 (set 3) features, respectively, representing in total 85 samples (5 sorted CTC, 7 plated BT474, 6 sorted BT474, 8 PB, 4 normal epithelium, and 55 primary breast tumors). Microarray data were deposited under GSE45965.
Two types of normalization were used. First, each set of arrays was normalized separately. Background correction was not performed as this increased noise in low signal features. Instead, a 2D spatial normalization approach using the robust local regression function 혱loess was performed to correct for uneven hybridization across individual arrays using the marray software package in the R. To achieve consistency between arrays, quantile normalization across samples was performed using the limma package in R. The three sets of arrays were merged into a single dataset by including those features consistent to all array sets. This resulted in 21,006 total genes for the combined dataset of 85 samples. To test for residual batch effects after normalization, we calculated the pairwise correlation matrix for all samples to verify that clustering patterns were driven by cell type rather than cDNA array design and processing batch.
To characterize differential expression between different cell types, we performed principal component analysis (PCA) and hierarchical clustering using the stats package in R. To verify that unsupervised clustering can reliably classify specimens, the p-values for each cluster were calculated via bootstrap resampling using standard Bootstrap Probability (BP) and a multi-scale bootstrapping method that is a better approximation to Approximately Unbiased (AU) (R package pvclust). Only probes of the array which exhibited a hybridization signal 2 fold above background in at least 10 % of specimens and with none of the spots flagged as bad were used for PCA, clustering, and all other analyses (7685 probes).
To identify genes with differential expression in sorted CTC samples relative to primary tumors, normal epithelium, and PB samples, we used ANOVA followed by Tukey analysis with Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) multiple testing correction applied at each step to adjust for potential false discovery (FDR). Genes with a FDR adjusted p value < 0.05 were considered significant. Functional and pathway analysis of differentially expressed genes were carried out with the DAVID functional/pathway enrichment analysis tool, using multiple testing corrected p-values that control for false discovery with significance threshold p < 0.05.
Samples were evaluated for intrinsic subtype using the PAM50 single-sample classification algorithm developed by Parker and Perou. Of the 50 genes in the PAM50 classifier, 21 were identified in the combined, quality filtered dataset (7685 probes), and used for analysis. The 21 genes available for this analysis were BCL2, CDC6, NUF2, CENPF, CEP55, CXXC5, EGFR, ERBB2, ESR1, FGFR4, FOXC1, GRB7, NDC80, KRT14, MYBL2, PTTG1, RRM2, TMEM45B, TYMS, UBE2C, and UBE2T. The remaining 29 genes in the PAM50 were either not present on the cDNA array probe set or did not meet the quality control criteria described above. We used a 90 % confidence interval (CI) in the subtype call to establish that gene expression levels of the 21 genes were correlated to the centroid of the subtype (otherwise the sample was considered unclassified). To assess differential risk of recurrence (ROR ~ P) scores across sample types, we used ANOVA followed by Tukey analysis.