Approval by the UCLA Institutional Review Board was obtained for non-obese women undergoing ovarian stimulation for IVF to enroll in this study by signing informed consent before participation. Study participants were between the ages of 25 and 44 years and had a body mass index (BMI) from 17 to 28.5 kg/m2. Exclusion criteria were galactorrhea, endometriomas, or ovarian cysts greater than 18 mm in diameter as possible modifiers of ovarian responsiveness to gonadotropin therapy. Women undergoing IVF who were obese (BMI ¥ 30) were also excluded to eliminate confouding effects of obesity on ovarian cell lipid content or steroidogenesis.
The methods for ovarian stimulation and oocyte retrieval have previously been reported. Briefly, women received either a GnRH antagonist (Ganirelix, Merck & Co. Inc., WhiteHouse Station, NJ), luteal phase leuprolide acetate (Lupron, TAP Pharmaceuticals, Deerfield, IL), or microdose leuprolide acetate ovarian stimulation, with recombinant human (rh) follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) or urinary gonadotropins starting at a dose of 225450 IU sc daily for three days and then changed thereafter as clinically indicated. Serial estradiol (E2) levels and transvaginal sonographic measurements of ovarian follicles were performed until at least two follicles reached ¥ 17 mm in diameter and serum E2 levels reached 300 pg/mL per dominant follicle. Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG, 10,000 IU, intramuscularly), choriogonadotropin alfa (500 ug sc, Ovidrel, EMD Serono, Inc., Rockland, MA) or leuprolide acetate (4 mg sc every 12 hours for 2 doses) was then administered, and transvaginal oocyte retrieval was performed 35.5 hours later.
When possible, a single ovarian puncture was used to aspirate all follicles and oocytes within an ovary. At oocyte retrieval, FF uncontaminated by blood was aspirated separately from the first follicle of each ovary, as previously described. Each follicle for study was selected by accessibility and size of at least 16 mm in mean diameter of three perpendicular planes to eliminate variability in FF steroid level by follicle size. Follicular fluid was transported on ice to the laboratory, centrifuged for 10 min at 1000 rpm at 4°C and stored in 0.5 mL aliquots at 80°C for later hormone determinations.
Follicular fluid levels of cortisol and cortisone were measured by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS: Quest Diagnostics Nichols Institute, San Juan Capistrano, CA), as previously described. In each patient, the mean FF cortisol and cortisone concentrations were derived from respective values of the first follicle aspirated for study from each ovary (N=2 follicles per individual). Within each patient, the cortisol and cortisone concentrations in the follicle of one ovary were comparable with those in the follicle of the contralateral ovary (within-subject correlations: 0.66, P<0.001, cortisol; 0.60, P<0.001, cortisone). The inter-follicle coefficients of variation (CV) for cortisol and cortisone were 16% and 15%, respectively. The lower limits of quantification (LOQ) for cortisol and cortisone were 0.026 and 0.15 g/dL, respectively.
Cumulus cells from all cumulus-oocyte complexes of a single individual were pooled together for lipid determination. Pooled cumulus cells were isolated by mechanical stripping after oocyte retrieval when cumulus-oocyte complexes were prepared for ICSI. Cells were transferred to culture dishes and were washed several times in 5 mL of MOPS (4-morpholinepropanesulfonic acid) buffered medium (G-MOPS„¢, VitroLife, Englewood, CO), containing 10% serum substitute supplement (Irvine Scientific, Santa Ana, CA). They then were resuspended in 100 L of recombinant human hyaluronidase (40120 U/ml) (ICSI Cumulase, Malov, Denmark), and pipetted up and down for 1 minute before being placed in the MOPS buffered medium. Pooled cumulus cells were initially centrifuged at 1600 rpm for 5 minutes at 24°C in the IVF laboratory. Cell samples were then transported on ice to the research laboratory, where they were resuspended in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 800 rpm at 20 °C within 12 hours.
Isolated cumulus cells were immediately fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in cell suspension for 20 minutes. Endogenous cumulus cell lipid content was determined using the fluorescence probe BODIPY FL C16 (0.8g/mL) (1 hour in the dark at room temperature) (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY). Cell staining included a 5-minute incubation with DAPI (0.5g/mL) (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) to identify the nuclei. Cells were resuspended in 30 uL of PBS and 3 uL of 10% polyvinylpyrrolidone solution with human serum albumin (Irvine Scientific, Santa Ana, CA) before being placed on glass slides for imaging.
Images were captured using the Leica TCS-SP2-AOBS confocal microscope with x63 oil objective, using identical magnification and gain settings, as previously described. The 488-line argon laser was used at 667 V to capture the BODIPY FL C16 lipid stain; the diode 405 nm laser was used at 436 V to capture DAPI nuclear stain. Image acquisition was performed using Leica Confocal Software (LCS) version 2.61 Build 1537. Fluorescent images of cumulus cell lipid content were quantified by one of two observers using ImageJ (http://rsbweb.nig.gov/ij/) to determine mean fluorescence (fluorescence/unit area) of 20 cells per patient. The reproducibility of quantitative cellular lipid measurements made by the two different observers measuring the same lipid quantity was large (0.96 [95% CI 0.860.99]), indicating a very high degree of consistency between the two observers.
Images taken as single channel images were converted to overlay images and all images were saved in Tag Image File Format (TIFF). Single channel images of BODIPY FL C16 and DAPI were used to create an overlay image, with single channel BODIPY FL C16 used for lipid quantification in ImageJ. Background staining was accounted for by measuring five negatively stained regions per cell, which were subtracted from the total mean fluorescence.
Total cellular RNA was isolated from cumulus cells using an RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and the manufacturers protocol. First strand cDNA was synthesized using first strand RT2 kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany); messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) was quantified by qRT-PCR using RT2 qPCR Master Mix according to manufacturers protocol (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). qRT-PCR was performed on an ABI 7300 (A&B Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) using standard temperature cycling conditions. Human primers for NR3C1 (chromosome 4: exons 7-8, length 68 bp), 11HSD, type 1 (chromosome 1: exons 3-4, length 67 bp) and type 2 (chromosome 16: exons 1-2, length 50 bp), HSL (chromosome 19: exons 1-2, length 67 bp) and LPL (chromosome 8: 6-7) (Life Technologies Corp, Chicago, IL) were used to detect mRNAs. To verify primer sets for 11HSD types 1 and 2 as well as NR3C1, cDNA obtained from mRNAs of human adipose stem cells (ASCs) and the 295R adrenocortical cell line (ATCC, Mannaras, VA) were used as positive controls. To verify primer sets for HSL and LPL, cDNA obtained from mRNA of human adipose tissue was used as a positive control. Human primers for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH: chromosome 12: exons: 6-7, length: 93 bp) and ribosomal protein L15 (RPL: chromosome 3: exons 2-3, length: 87 bp) were used to detect GAPDH and RPL mRNA as internal control housekeeping genes (Life Technologies Corp, Chicago, IL). As a negative control, first strand DNA synthesis was performed without mRNA followed by qRT-PCR. Each measurement was performed in triplicate with at least three independent experiments conducted for each sample.
The relative expression of target genes was measured using the comparative critical threshold (Ct) method. The results were expressed as mRNA expression relative to GADPH using the formula 2delta Ct (delta Ct is the difference between the mean Ct values of targeted genes and the mean Ct value GAPDH).
Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated to examine the associations between mean FF cortisol and cortisone levels as well as the mean FF cortisol/cortisone ratios with pooled cumulus cell lipid content, the total number of oocytes (mature and immature) retrieved, patient demographics and IVF cycle characteristics. For significant correlations, least squares regression lines were calculated and then plotted. Patient age and numbers of oocytes retrieved were incorporated into the regression models as necessary to determine if significant associations held after controlling for these variables.
Statistical analyses were performed in SPSS 21 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY). A P value of 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Patient/IVF cycle characteristics, mean FF cortisol and cortisone levels as well as mRNA expression of NR3C1, 11HSD type 1/2, HSL and LPL relative to GAPDH are expressed as mean  standard error of the mean (SEM).