Tumor tissues were obtained with written informed consent from the Ruijin Hospital affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Shanghai Jiaotong University. Patients with HCC (nŠ=Š53) were enrolled in our study (Table 1), and cancer tissues and pair non-tumor tissues were collected. Hepatoma cells (Huh7 and HepG2) were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA), and cultured in DMEM (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA,) with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco).
Total RNA was extracted from tissues or cell lines using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), and reverse transcription (RT) reactions were performed using miR-150-5p-special prime. The specific stemloop RT primers for miR-150-5p were designed as previously described. RT reactions for mRNA were carried out using the Oligo dT primer. qPCR was performed using a standard protocol from the SYBR Green PCR kit (Toyobo, Osaka, Japan) on Applied Biosystems 7300 real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). U6 and -actin were used as references for miRNAs and mRNAs, respectively.
Human miR-150-5p (UCUCCCAACCCUUGUACCAGUG) or 2-O-methyl modified miR-150 inhibitor (CACUGGUACAAGGGUUGGGAGA) were transfected to hepatoma cells by using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer.
Western blot analysis to assess MMP14 and -actin expression was performed as previously described. MMP14 and -actin primary antibodies were purchased from Abcam and Sigma, respectively.
HCC cells (12106 cells/well) were treated with indicated reagents, and wounds were made using a 1000 µl plastic pipette tip. The size of wound was measured after 48 h of wound formation and photographed.
Cell invasion assay was carried out using Transwell chambers with inserts of 8-µm pore size (Corning Costar) as described previously. Briefly, hepatoma cell (Huh7 or HepG2) suspended in serum free medium was seeded onto Matrigel-coated Transwell filters in Biocoat Matrigel invasion chambers. The complete medium (DMEM with 10% FBS) was used as a chemoattractant in the lower chamber. The hepatoma cells were treated with indicated reagents for 72 h, and cells on the lower surface of the membrane were stained with Crystal violet. The cell numbers were determined by counting of the penetrating cells under a microscope at 200 magnification in random fields in each well.
pGL3 plasmid encoding a luciferase reporter gene was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI). Recombinant plasmid of pGL3-MMP14-3-UTR (wildtype) or pGL3-MMP14-3-UTR-Mutation was constructed in our laboratory. HepG2 cells (12105 cells/well) were plated in a 24-well plate and cotransfected with 40nM of either miR-150 or miRNA control, 20 ng of either pGL3-MMP14-3-UTR or pGL3-MMP14-3-UTR-Mutation, and 2 ng of pRL-TK (Promega, Madison, WI) by using Lipofectamine 2000. The pRL-TK vector was used as an internal control to correct the differences in both transfection and harvest efficiencies. HepG2 cells were collected 48 h after transfection and analyzed using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega).
The athymic BALB/C mice (46 weeks old) were purchased from the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Shanghai, China), and were bred in a specific pathogen-free facility. The protocol was approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Shanghai Jiaotong University. All surgery was performed under sodium pentobarbital anesthesia, and all efforts were made to minimize suffering. Huh7 cells overexpressed with miR-150-5p were subcutaneously injected into the flanks of nude mice, and Huh7 cells were used as mock control. After 6 weeks, the mice were killed and lung metastases were monitored after inducing deep anesthesia.
Data are expressed as mean  standard deviation (SD) from at least three separate experiments. The differences between groups were analyzed using Students t test. Differences were deemed statistically significant at p<0.05.