The wheat cultivars Yumai 34 and Ukrainka were identified as having unusually high and low contents of total and soluble pentosans, respectively, as part of a broad screen of 150 wheat lines (Gebruers et al.,) carried out under the EU FP6 HEALTHGRAIN program (Poutanen et al.,). Ten F5 lines were therefore selected from this population to represent a range of pentosan content levels and grown together at Rothamsted from 201112. The growing sites were split into land blocks, with the wheat cultivars sown in a randomized design within each block. Standard agronomy was used with 200 kg N/Ha.
Dry matter (DM) in wheat was determined by drying of samples in a forced draft oven at 105°C to a constant weight. Ash was measured in a muffle furnace at 500°C for 18 h. Crude protein (6.25 X N) in wheat was determined by the combustion method (AOAC,) using a Leco (FP-528 N, Leco Corp., St. Joseph, MI). Oil (as ether extract) was extracted with diethyl ether by the ether extraction method (AOAC,) using a Soxtec system (Foss UK Ltd.). The gross energy (GE) value of wheat samples was determined in a bomb calorimeter (model 6200; Parr Instrument Co., Moline, IL) with benzoic acid used as the standard.
Total (TP) and water extractable (WP) pentosans in the whole grain were determined as described by the method of Finnie et al. and Douglas. Kinematic water extracted viscosity (KV) was measured using an automated viscometer (AVS 310 Schott Gerate, Germany) fitted with an Oswald capillary tube. Dynamic water extracted viscosity (DV) was measured with a rotating cone and cup viscometer (model DV-II + LV Brookfield, Stroughton, MA, USA).
Hagberg falling number (HFN) was measured by Hagberg falling number apparatus model 1800 (Falling Number AB, Stockholm, Sweden) (AOAC,). Endosperm hardness was determined by the single-kernel characterization system (SKCS) model 4100 (Perten Instruments North America, Inc., Reno, NV). Specific density (kg/hl) of wheat samples was measured with a chondrometer (Farm Tech, Whitby, UK).
All procedures were approved by The Animal Experimental Committee of Harper Adams University.
Ten diets containing 630 g/kg of each of the ten experimental wheat samples were prepared after mixing with 370 g/kg of a balancer (Table 1). Each diet was then split into two equal batches and one of them was supplemented with 2000 units/kg of a commercial xylanase (Danisco Xylanase, Danisco Animal Nutrition, Marlborough, UK), resulting in 20 diets in total. The enzyme preparation was based on endo-1,4-beta-xylanase produced by Trichoderma reesei. No adjustments were made for differences in dry matter between the wheat samples because only a small range of differences were observed.
The objectives of the broiler feeding experiment were to compare the growth performance of broilers and determine the AME corrected for N retention (AMEn) in diets containing the experimental wheat samples with and without enzyme supplementation. Male Ross 308 broiler chickens were obtained from a commercial hatchery at one-day old and were placed in a single floor pen and fed on a proprietary broiler starter feed until 6 d of age. On the first day of the experimental period (at 7 d of age), the chicks were individually weighed and randomly placed in one of the experimental pens. Two birds were placed in each pen (0.4m X 0.4m solid floor area) within a controlled environment room. Each diet was fed at random to 6 pens from 7 to 21 d age. The temperatures were kept at 30°C until the chickens were 7 d of age and were gradually reduced to 20°C at the end of the 14 d feeding period. A standard lighting program for broilers was used, decreasing the light:dark ratio from 23h:1h from day old to 18h:6h at 7 d of age, which was maintained until the end of the study. Access to the feed and the water was ad libitum.
During the last four days of the experiment, the solid floor of each pen was replaced with a wire mesh and all excreta were collected and immediately dried at 60°C and then milled. Feed intakes were also measured for the same period. The gross energy, dry matter, nitrogen, and fat of each dried excreta sample and the experimental diets were determined as described for the wheat samples. The AMEn of the diets was calculated as described by Hill and Anderson. The coefficients of total tract fat digestibility (FD), dry matter (DMR) and nitrogen retention (NR) were determined as the difference between intake and excretion (retention) of the nutrient divided by their respective intake.
The concentration of mucin in the excreta, measured as sialic acid (SA), was determined by the periodate-resorcinol method described by Jourdian et al..
On the last day of the feeding period at 21 d of age, the birds were weighed and killed by cervical dislocation. The contents from the bottom of the duodenal loop to Meckel's diverticulum of the digestive tracts of both birds in one pen were immediately collected and pooled, then centrifuged (10 000g for 2 min) and their viscosity measured as described by Bedford and Classen.
Statistical analyses were performed using the Genstat statistical software package (Genstat 15th release 3.22 for Windows; IACR, Rothamstead, Hertfordshire, UK). The AMEn content of the experimental diets, broiler growth performance, nutrient digestibility, and digesta viscosity were compared statistically by analysis of variance using a 10  2 factorial arrangement of treatments. The main effects analyzed were related to the effects of the pentosan content of the wheats with and without xylanase. The comparison between the experimental results was performed by ANOVA, and the treatment sum of squares was partitioned into orthogonal contrasts testing for the linear and quadratic responses to total pentosan content of wheat and their interactions with the addition of exogenous xylanase. Correlation coefficients were also generated to determine if there is a relationship between the wheat pentosans, viscosity, and growth performance variables. The data from the animal experiments were substituted by their standardized residuals; this eliminated the effects of the dietary enzyme. In all instances, differences were reported as significant at P < 0.05. Tendencies towards significance (0.05 < P < 0.1) were also reported.