Testicular biopsies were obtained from 50 OA patients (age ranging from 22 to 35 years old) who underwent microdissection and testicular sperm extraction (MD-TEST) at Ren Ji Hospital affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine. All patients with OA were caused by inflammation and vasoligation but not by congenital absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD) or other diseases including cancer. This study was approved by the Institutional Ethical Review Committee of Ren Ji Hospital (license number of ethics statement: 201201), Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, and the consents for testicular biopsies were obtained from the donors for research only.
Testicular biopsies from OA patients were fixed in Bouins fixative overnight, embedded in paraffin and sectioned at 5 m thickness. The sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and observed to check spermatogenesis status under a microscope.
Testicular biopsies obtained from OA patients were washed three times aseptically in Dulbecco modified Eagle medium (DMEM) (Gibco) containing antibiotic with penicillin and streptomycin (Gibco). Human seminiferous tubules were isolated from testis biopsies by the first enzymatic digestion comprising 2 mg/ml collagenase IV (Gibco) and 1 g/l DNase I (Gibco) in 34°C water bath for 15 min pursuant to the procedure as described previously. Sertoli cells and human male germ cells were obtained from seminiferous tubules using a second enzymatic digestion with 4 mg/ml collagenase IV, 2.5 mg/ml hyaluronidase (Sigma), 2 mg/ml trypsin (Sigma) and 1 g/l DNase I and followed by differential plating according to the procedure as we previously described. For differential plating, cell suspension was seeded into culture plates in DMEM/F-12 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco) and incubated at 34°C in 5% CO2 overnight. After incubation, the medium containing male germ cells were removed, and Sertoli cells attached to culture plates. The viability of freshly isolated human Sertoli cells was assessed by exclusion of trypan blue staining. Human Sertoli cells were identified by immunostaining with antibodies against GATA4, WT1, vimentin (VIM), GDNF, BMP4, SCF, and PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear antigen) as described below.
Human Sertoli cells were cultured with DMEM/F12 supplemented 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Gibco), 2 mM L-glutamine (Invitrogen), and 100 unit/ml penicillin and streptomycin (Gibco). The cells were passaged when cell confluence reached 80%, and they were maintained at 34°C in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator and cultivated for 2 months. The proliferation potentials of human Sertoli cells at different passages were detected by cell counting using the cytometer.
Total RNA was extracted from freshly isolated and passaged human Sertoli cells using the Trizol reagent (Invitrogen), and the quality and concentrations of total RNA were measured by Nanodrop. Reverse transcription (RT) was performed using the First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Thermo Scientific), and PCR of the cDNA was carried out according to the protocol as described previously. The primers of the chosen genes, including GATA1 (GATA binding protein 1), GATA4 (GATA binding protein 4), WT1 (Wilms tumor 1), GDNF, BMP4, SCF, FGF2 (fibroblast growth factor 2), EGF (epithelial growth factor), FSHR (follicle-stimulating hormone receptor), AR (androgen receptor), ABP (androgen binding protein, also known as sex hormone-binding globulin, SHBG), and ACTB (actin beta), were designed and listed in Table 1. The PCR reaction started at 94°C for 2 min and was performed as follows: denaturation at 94°C for 30 sec, annealing at 55-60°C for 45 sec as listed in Table 1, and elongation at 72°C for 45 sec. After 35 cycles, the samples were incubated for an additional 5 min at 72°C. PCR products were separated by electrophoresis on 2% agarose gel and visualized with ethidium bromide. Images were recorded and band intensities were analyzed using chemiluminescence (Chemi-Doc XRS, Bio-Rad). RNA without reverse transcriptase enzyme but with PCR of ACTB primers served as negative controls. The integrated density values (IDV) of target gene products were quantified relatively by comparing with the expression of housekeeper gene ACTB.
For immunocytochemical staining, the freshly isolated and cultured human Sertoli cells as well as human male germ cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 30 min, washed three times with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and permeabilized in 0.4% triton-X 100 (Sigma) for 5 min. After washing with PBS, the cells were blocked in 2% BSA for 30 min and followed by incubation with primary antibodies, including anti-GATA4 (Santa Cruz), WT1 (Santa Cruz), GDNF (Santa Cruz), anti-SCF (Sigma), anti-BMP4 (Abcam), anti- VIM (Santa Cruz), anti-PCNA (Sigma), anti-SMA (smooth muscle alpha actin, Abcam) and CYP11A1 (cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme, Abcam) at a dilution with 1:200 overnight at 4°C. Isotype IgGs for the first antibody were used as the negative controls. After extensive washes with PBS for 30 min, the cells were incubated with the secondary antibody IgG (Sigma) conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) or rhodamine at a 1:200 dilution for 1 hour at room temperature. DAPI (4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) was used to label the nuclei, and the cells were observed for epifluorescence under a fluorescence microscope (Leica).
Total RNA was obtained from human Sertoli cells at passage one (P1), passage five (P5) and passage ten (P10) using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen). The concentrations and purity of total RNA were evaluated by measuring the 260/280 nm ratio, and the integrity of total RNA was assessed by 1.0% denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis. Five micrograms of total RNA were reverse-transcribed into single strand cDNA that was subsequently converted to double strand cDNA. The purified double strand cDNA served as a template to synthesize biotin-labeled cRNA using the GeneChip2 WT Terminal Labeling Kit (Affymetrix), and the biotin-labeled cRNA was purified using the GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module kit (Affymetrix) and fragmented to 35200 bases. The fragmented cRNA was hybridized to Affymetrix GeneChip Human Gene 1.0 ST Arrays and stained using the GeneChip2 Hybridization, Wash, and Stain Kit (Affymetrix). The arrays were scanned with a GeneChip2 Scanner 3000 7G (Affymetrix), and raw data were analyzed using the GeneSpringGX software.
The cultured human Sertoli cells at different passages were lysed with RIPA buffer (Santa Cruz) for 30 min on ice. After 30 min lysis on ice, cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 12,000 g, and the concentration of protein was measured by BCA kit (Dingguo Company, China). Thirty micrograms of cell lysate from each sample were used for SDS-PAGE (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Richmond, CA), and Western blots were performed according to the protocol as described previously. The chosen antibodies included anti-SCF (Sigma), anti-GDNF (Santa Cruz), anti-BMP4 (Abcam), anti-PCNA (Santa Cruz), anti-phos-AKT (Cell Signaling), and anti-phos-SMAD1/5 (Cell Signaling). After extensive washes with PBS, the blots were detected by chemiluminescence (Chemi-Doc XRS, Bio-Rad), and the integrated density values (IDV) was calculated by comparing the signals of target proteins with that of housekeeper ACTB (Santa Cruz).
All the values were presented as meanSEM, and statistically significant differences (p<0.05) between different passages of human Sertoli cells were determined using the analysis of variance (ANOVA) and a 2-tailed t-test. The band intensities of Western blots were quantified by ImageJ software (NIH).