The immortalized human esophageal epithelial cell line (EPC2-hTERT) (kindly provided by Anil Rustgi, MD, University of Pennsylvania) were cultured as previously described.
All patients analyzed in this study provided written consents and all studies were approved by the Institutional Review Board at Cincinnati Childrens Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) (#20080090). Patients analyzed by RNA sequencing have been characterized previously. In brief, patients with active EoE were defined as having a previous EoE diagnosis while being unresponsive to proton pump inhibitor therapy and having greater than 15 eosinophils per high-powered microscopic field (HPF) within a distal esophageal biopsy. Patients with EoE in disease remission were defined as having a previous EoE diagnosis and having less than 15 eosinophils/HPF within a distal esophageal biopsy while undergoing dietary therapy (elimination or elemental) or on swallowed glucocorticoids at the time of biopsy. Healthy (NL) controls had no previous diagnosis of EoE and no eosinophils within a distal esophageal biopsy.
The ALI differentiation protocol was performed as previously described. Briefly, immortalized esophageal epithelial cells (EPC2-hTERT) were seeded onto semi-permeable membranes (0.4 m) and grown to confluence in the presence of low-calcium media (keratinocyte serum-free media, 0.09 mM calcium). Epithelial differentiation was induced by the addition of extracellular calcium (1.8 mM final concentration) over the course of five days (day 3 to 8). Stratification was induced by removing the media from the upper chamber and exposing the cells to the ALI for a period of 6 days (day 8 to 14). Treatment with IL-13 (100 ng/mL) in the lower chamber occurred at the start of the ALI exposure (day 8), with fresh media plus IL-13 added every 3 days until day 14. Cells were then collected for RNA and histology.
RNA sequencing analysis was performed by the CCHMC Genetic Variation and Gene Discovery Core. In brief, RNA was isolated using the RNeasy kit (QIAGEN Incorporated, Germantown, MD) according to the manufacturers protocol. Whole-transcriptome (RNA) sequencing was performed at the CCHMC Gene Discovery and Genetic Variation Core as previously described. Sequencing reads were aligned against the GRCh37 genome model using TopHat 2.04 with Bowtie 2.03. The separate alignments were then merged using Cuffmerge with UCSC gene models as a reference. Raw data were assessed for statistical significance using a Welch t-test (esophageal biopsies) or ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc test (ALI samples) with Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate and a threshold of P < 0.05 and a 2.0-fold cut-off filter in GeneSpring GX (Agilent Technologies Incorporated, Santa Clara, CA). RNA sequencing data were deposited into the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (GSE58640 and GSE65335).
RNA isolated from the ALI samples were used for cDNA synthesis (iScript, BioRad, Hercules, CA). Quantitative PCR analysis using SYBR Green was performed (BioRad, Hercules, CA). Primers used for amplification were as follows: KRT78, forward (TGGACTTCAGCAGCATCATC) and reverse (CTGGGCAGACACCTGAAGTT); IL13, forward (ACAGCCCTCAGGGAGCTCAT) and reverse (TCAGGTTGATGCTCCATACCAT). All data were normalized to the housekeeping gene GAPDH as previously described. Normalized data are presented as mean with SEM and were assessed for statistical significance using an ANOVA with Tukeys multiple comparison tests and unpaired t-test with a significance threshold of P < 0.05.
 KRT78 was cloned in frame with the GFP into pEGFPN1 vector at EcoRI and BamHI site using the primers (GCGAATTCGGACCATGTCTCTCTCCCCATGCCG) and (GCGGATCCCGGTAGGTGATGGATGT), respectively. Transfections were performed using TransIT-LT1 transfection reagent (Mirus Bio, Madison, WI).
Primary protein sequence alignment was retrieved from the Human Intermediate Filament Database (www.interfil.org). Cladogram construction and phylogenetic analysis were performed using http://phylogeny.lirmm.fr/ as described.
Transduced EPC2-hTERT cells were grown on chamber slides (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA), and immunofluorescent staining for DSG1 and nuclear staining with DAPI was performed as previously described and imaged using an Olympus B51x system.
Protein lysates were prepared from biopsy tissues using M-PER mammalian protein extraction reagent (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) with protease inhibitors and by sonication and centrifugation. BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) was used to quantify protein. Lane Marker Reducing Sample Buffer (5X; Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) was added to the soluble protein fraction after centrifugation, and 6 g of protein was loaded in SDS page gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Protein was transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, blocked in Odyssey blocking buffer (LI-COR biosciences, Lincoln, NB), and probed with rabbit anti-KRT78 antibody (PA5-26855; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL) and rabbit anti-GAPDH (#2118; Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA) at 1:1000 each in Odyssey blocking buffer. Following primary antibody incubation, membranes were probed with goat anti-Rabbit IRDye 800CW (9263211; LI-COR biosciences, Lincoln, NB) and imaged using a LiCOR Odyssey CLX system.