The trial was a nonblinded multicenter randomized phase III study conducted within the Pan-European Trial in Adjuvant Colon Cancer network as described previously. A total of 1382 patients with stages II to III adenocarcinoma of the colon were selected. All patients were between 18 and 75 years old. The aim of this trial was to assess whether the addition of irinotecan to de Gramont infusional fluorouracil/leucovorin would improve disease-free survival (DFS) in patients with stage III colon cancer. Trial design and the identification of several prognostic markers based on the trial data were reported previously. The trial was conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki and its conduction was monitored by a steering committee and an independent data monitoring committee.
Multiplex PCR was performed in a 5L volume containing MegaMix Gold (Cambio), 510ng of genomic DNA, and 100nM of each PCR primer. Thermocycling was performed at 95°C for 15min, followed by 45 cycles of 94°C for 20s, 56°C for 30s, and 72°C for 60s, followed by a final extension of 72°C for 3min. Unincorporated dNTPs were deactivated using 0.3 units of shrimp alkaline phosphatase (Clontech Laboratories, Inc., Mountain View, USA) at 37° for 40min and primer extension was carried out using 714M of each primer extension probe (depending on the mass), 1 unit of iPLEX termination mix, and 1 unit of iPLEX enzyme.
Reactions were cycled at 94°C for 30s, followed by 44 cycles of 94°C for 5s, 5 times (52°C for 5s and 80°C for 5s). After the addition of a cation exchange resin (Sequenom Inc.) to remove residual salt from the reactions, 20L of water was added and the extension product was spotted onto a matrix pad (3-hydroxypicoloinic acid) of a SpectroCHIP (Sequenom Inc.). After analyzing the SpectroCHIPs using a MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer, spectra were processed by the SpectroREADER software (Sequenom Inc.) and transferred to the MassARRAY Typer 4 Analyzer (Sequenom Inc.) for further analysis. Genotyping for every sample was performed using the default settings of the MassARRAY Typer 4 Analyzer. Genotyping calls were generated and were validated by manual review of the raw mass spectra.
Microarray analysis was performed on CRC tumor samples of 688 patients as described previously. In brief, RNA of sufficient quantity and quality was extracted from the tumor samples, and gene expressions were measured on the ALMAC colorectal cancer DSA platform (Craigavon, Northern Ireland) with a customized Affymetrix chip with 61,528 probe sets mapping to 15,920 unique Entrez Gene IDs. Three different probe sets were used to analyze the expression of FURIN: CB852900_s, NM_002569, and NM_002569_x.
pGL2-P1-SacI construct, here referred to as pGL2-P1C which contains a DNA fragment, starting at the Pst1 site in exon 1 and extending to the Sac1 site 2,6kb upstream, in the luciferase construct pGL2 has previously been described. This construct contains part of the human P1 promoter of FURIN containing the C allele of the SNP 229C/T (rs4932178). The QuickChange site directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene) was used to mutate this C into a T according to the instructions of the manufacturer, using the primers: 5-GGTAAGTGCAGACTCACCCCAATAAATGAGG-3 and 5-CCTCATTTATTGGGGTGAGTCTGCACTTACC-3. The resulting construct, referred to as pGl2-P1T, was sequenced to confirm the mutation.
500ng of the plasmids pGL2-P1C and pGL2-P1T and pGL2-basic were transfected in HuH7, Caco-2, and SW480 cells using FuGENE 6 as a transfection reagent according to the manufacturer's protocol in 24-well plates. 50ng/well of pRL-tk (Renilla luciferase expression construct, Promega) was used for normalization of the transfection efficiencies. Each construct was transfected at least three times in triplicate. 24 hours after transfection, cells were lysed and assayed for luciferase activity using the dual luciferase assay system (Promega) according to the instructions of the manufacturer.
The observed allele frequencies were tested for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and the differences between the observed and the expected frequencies were tested for significance using the Chi-square test. Kaplan-Meier methods were used to estimate the survival probabilities (postoperative relapse-free survival and overall survival) and the log-rank test was used to assess differences between patients with the three different SNPs. The association between the expression of FURIN and overall survival was analyzed by Cox regression using continuous FURIN expression values. The hazard ratio (HR) and the 95% CI were determined with the CC allele as reference level.
The unpaired t-test was used to analyze the data for the luciferase experiments. The association of the alleles with gene expression levels was done with the Kruskal-Wallis test. P values are two-sided, considered significant if <0.05 and not adjusted for multiple testing. Statistical analyses have been performed using R version 2.12.0 or later (http://www.r-project.org/).