The ethics committee of Hannover Medical School approved the collection of blood from healthy donors (MHH ethics committee No. 9682011) as well as from kidney transplant recipients (KTR) (No. 5970.124). All participants have signed a written informed consent based on written patient information prior to sample collection. PBMC were prepared by Ficoll (Biochrom, Germany) separation and either cryopreserved or used directly. Details of patients (n = 29) and healthy donors (n = 11) are given in Table 1. PBMC of four randomly selected KTR were subjected to further in vitro analysis. The categorization of the KTx patients according to transplant pathology was based upon a histopathological examination of a (protocol or indication) transplant biopsy on the day of the sample collection according to the current Banff-classification. Induction therapy using the IL-2 receptor antagonist basiliximab was given to 17 patients (58.6%), seven (24.1%) patients had no induction therapy, three (10.4%) were treated with ATG and two (6.9%) with rituximab. Standard immunosuppression comprised oral triple immunosuppression with cyclosporin A (CsA) or tacrolimus (Tac) in combination with corticosteroids and the nucleosid analogon mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), a subset of patients received Tac plus sirolimus (T/S).
NK cells were MACS-isolated using a NK cell negative isolation kit (Miltenyi, Germany) according to the manufacturers instructions. Purity as determined by flow cytometry was >90% CD3-CD56+ NK cells.
PBMC were incubated with directly labeled mAbs for 30 min at 4°C, washed with PBS containing 2.5% FBS (Life Technologies, NY,USA) and 0.1% sodium azide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and fixed with PBS containing 1% paraformaldehyde (Merck, Germany). All Abs and conjugates are summarized in S1 Table.
For combined surface and intracellular staining, cells were incubated with mAbs staining surface molecules for 30 min at room temperature, washed with PBS, permeabilized with fixation/permeabilization buffer for another 30 min and incubated with mAbs staining intracellular NFAT2 and IFN- in permeabilization buffer (eBiosciences, San Diego, USA) for 30 min at 4°C. mAbs for cell surface staining are given in S1 Table, mAbs for intracellular staining: NFAT2-AF488 (7A6, Biolegend, San Diego, USA) and IFN--PE (B27, Becton-Dickinson, USA). After two washings steps with PBS, cells were analyzed by flow cytometry (LSR II, Becton-Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA), data were processed using FACS-Diva software 6.1.2.
PBMC or isolated NK cells (1 x106/ml) were pre-incubated for 20 minutes with 5 M inhibitor (Cyclosporin A, Tacrolimus, Sirolimus, Everolimus, myophenolic acid (MPA)) or solvent (DMSO or ethanol). Cells were stimulated for 6h or 24h with 50 ng/ml phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) and 2.5 g/ml ionomycin (both Sigma-Aldrich) in RPMI1640 supplemented with 2mM L-glutamine, 1mM sodium pyruvate, 100U/ml penicillin/streptomycin containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, TM) or left untreated. Cells and supernatants were harvested after 6h or 24h; cells were analyzed for surface and intracellular molecules, supernatants were analyzed by multiplex cytokine analyses.
Cytokine concentrations in supernatants of treated PMBC or isolated NK cells were quantified by the Luminex-based multiplex technique according to the manufacturers instructions (BioRad, Hercules, USA). Standard curves and concentrations were calculated with Bio-Plex Manager 6.1 software.
The human IFN- ELISpot antibody pair (BD) was used for assays performed according to the manufacturers instructions. PBMC of KTR or healthy individuals were stimulated with K562 cells with a ratio of 3:1 in triplicates. Stimulation was performed for 18h in TM, IFN- spots were quantified by Immunospot S5 UV-Reader, Immunospot 5.1 software (CTL, Shaker Heights, OH, USA). Supernatants were collected and analyzed for perforin and granzyme A/B content using multiplex technology. To control for the individual proportion of NK cells, PBMC were simultaneously analyzed by FACS, percentages of NK cells were measured and IFN- ELISpots, perforin and granzyme A/B concentrations of all experiments were normalized to 10,000 NK cells per well.
Kolmogorov-Smirnov and d'Agostino & Pearson omnibus normality tests were performed to determine Gaussean distribution before application of Students t test or two-sided One-way-ANOVA with Tukeys post-test or Dunnetts Multiple Comparison test. For non-parametric data, either a Mann-Whitney-U-test or, for multiple comparisons, Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunns post-test were chosen. Significance was defined as p 0.05 (GraphPadPrism 5.01, La Jolla, CA, USA).