The Institutional Review Boards of the West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University and Guangdong Provincial Stomatological Hospital approved this study. The study was approved by the ethics committee both of the West China Hospital of Stomatology and the Guangdong Provincial Stomatological Hospital and was conducted in agreement with the Helsinki Declaration. Written informed consent was provided by all participants at baseline and during follow-up.
A total of 368 postoperative patients with primary OSCC tumors received regular follow-up. Follow-up visits entailed at least a medical history and clinical examination. In addition to scheduled visits, all patients could initiate visits if they were concerned that they had recurrence or a new primary tumor. The survival time of each patient was calculated from the day of surgery until the time of cancer-related death or the end of the follow-up period, death for other reasons led to censoring of data. The detailed information of three cohorts was described in Supplemental Patients and Methods.
An independent cohort of 460 patient specimens obtained between 1992 and 2013 in the TCGA database (http://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/) was used as an external validation cohort to validate the prognostic value of PA28 in patients with HNSCC (Table S1).
All animal studies were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee, State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, in compliance with the Guide for the U.S. Public Health Service's policy on humane care and use of laboratory animals. Animals were housed within 12-h light/dark cycles and received food, standard rodent chow, and water ad libitum in compliance with the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International guidelines. Other methods are detailed in Supplemental Patients and Methods including Cell Culture and siRNA transfections, western blot analysis, MTT, colony-formation, propidium iodide (PI) staining, flow cytometry, TUNEL, cell invasion, cell migration, in vivo tumor-formation assay, and immunohistochemistry.
Baseline characteristics among the patients were compared using the mixed linear model for continuous variables and the Ï2 test or Fisher's Exact Test for categorical variables. OS and DFS were estimated using the KaplanMeier method, with a log-rank test in a univariate analysis. Multivariate survival analysis was done using the Cox proportional hazards model. Model discrimination was measured using C Statistic for survival analysis. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve area was used in the prediction model.
Statistical analyses were performed using SAS software, version 9.3 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). Unless stated otherwise, two-sided P < 0.05 were considered significant. Details on data analysis are provided in the Supplementary.