T1D patients receiving care at the Endocrinology and Nutrition Service, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias (Oviedo, Spain) were enrolled in this phase 1/phase 2, open-label clinical trial conducted from November 27, 2012 through October 1, 2014. The principal investigator designed the clinical trial and received ethical approval for the clinical treatment protocol and consent form from Regional Committee for Clinical Research Ethics and the Comisin Permanente de Trasplantes del Consejo Interterritorial del Sistema Nacional de Salud. The signed informed consent was obtained from each participant. The clinical trial was conducted in 15 subjects with established T1D (Table 1). Subjects were qualified for recruitment if they met the 2012 diagnosis standards of the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and if a blood test indicated the presence of at least one autoantibody to pancreatic islet  cells (Fig. 1). Key exclusion criteria included clinically significant liver (AST or ALT 2 ¥ x upper limit of normal), kidney (creatinine ¥ 2.0 mg/dl), or heart disease; pregnancy or breastfeeding mothers; immunosuppressive medication; known active infection with viral diseases; or diseases associated with immunodeficiency; or hemoglobin < 10 g/dl or platelets < 100 k/ml; use of immunosuppressive medication within one month.
All the participants received two treatments with the SCE (Tianhe Stem Cell Biotechnology, USA). The preparation of CB-SC cultures and SCEs was performed as previously described. Briefly, human cord blood units derived from healthy allogeneic donors were obtained from Centro Comunitario de Sangre y Tejidos de Asturias (CCST, Oviedo, Spain). All cord blood samples were screened for HIV I&II, HBsAg, HBcAg, HCV, HIVNAT, STS, HBVNAT, HCVNAT, HTLV I/II, West Nile, Chagas, and CMV, and only pathogen-free cord blood units were used for clinical treatment. Human CB-SCs were produced as previously described with the following modifications. Cord blood mononuclear cells were plated in SCE devices in serum-free culture medium (Lonza, Walkersville, MD) and incubated at 37 °C, in 8% CO2. After 23 weeks, CB-SCs growing at 90% confluence (about 107 cells/device) were prepared for clinical trial. CB-SCs were characterized by flow cytometry, using markers such as the leukocyte common antigen CD45 and embryonic stem (ES) cell-specific transcription factor OCT3/4 (Fig. S1). The measured endotoxin level was < 0.05 EU/ml. One Educator device was generated from one cord blood unit, and used for one subject at one treatment.
For the SCE therapy, a 16-gauge IV needle was placed in the left (or right) median cubital vein, and the patient's blood was passed through a Blood Cell Separator MCS + (Haemonetics, Braintree, MA) to isolate mononuclear cells (MNC) in accordance with the manufacturer's recommended protocol. For a single session of MNC collection by apheresis, approximately 10 l of blood was processed from each enrolled subject within 67 h, with the collection of about 1  1010 MNCs. The isolated mononuclear cells were transferred into the SCE device for the treatment with allogeneic CB-SCs, and other blood components were automatically returned to the patient's circulation. In the SCE device, MNC ioslated from a patient's peripheral blood were slowly passed through the stacked discs with adherent CB-SCs at the CB-SCs:MNC ratios from 1:20 to 1:50. After interaction for 23 h (Fig. S2), CB-SC-treated mononuclear cells were returned to the patient's blood circulation via a dorsal vein in the hand with physiological saline. It took 89 h. Patients were hospitalized for one day to monitor temperature and conduct blood count tests for adverse reactions following treatment. After 3 months, all subjects received a 2nd treatment with SCE therapy, as described above. Follow-up visits were scheduled 2, 8, 12, 18, 26, 40 and 56 weeks after treatment for clinical assessments and laboratory tests (Fig. 2). Previous work demonstrated that patients receiving sham therapy did not show changes in immune modulation.
To evaluate the -cell function, fasting and glucagon-stimulated C-peptide levels were examined at baseline and after treatments with SCE therapy. The glucagon-stimulated C-peptide test was performed as previously described. Glucagon (1 mg, i.v.) was administrated within 30 s, and six minutes later, plasma samples were collected for the C-peptide test by Ultrasensitive C-peptide ELISA kit (Mercodia, Uppsala, Sweden).
The primary study end points were feasibility and safety of the SCE therapy through 56 weeks post-treatment and preliminary evaluation of the efficacy of the therapy for changing immune markers in T1D subjects. The secondary study end point was preliminary evidence for efficacy of the therapy in the improvement of -cell function. Baseline blood samples were collected prior to SCE therapy.
Human buffy coat blood units were purchased from the Blood Center of New Jersey (East Orange, NJ). Human peripheral blood-derived mononuclear cells (PBMC) were harvested as previously described. To examine the immune modulating effects of CB-SCs on T cells via the mixed leukocyte reactions (MLR), responder cells were co-cultured with allogeneic stimulator cells irradiated at 3000 rad at the R:S ratio of 1:2, in the presence or absence of CB-SCs. The ratio of CB-SCs:responder was 1:10. After 45 days of co-culture, cells were photographed with an Olympus IX71 inverted microscope and collected for flow analysis.
To analyze the CCR7 expression on CD45RO+ CD62L TEM cells, adult peripheral blood-mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were cocultured with CB-SCs at the CB-SCs:PBMCs ratio of 1:10 in serum-free culture medium (Lonza, Walkersville, MD) and incubated at 37 °C, in 8% CO2. The untreated PBMCs served as control. The CB-SC-treated PBMCs were collected for flow cytometry at 24 and 48 h respectively.
To perform ex vivo studies, human cord blood units were provided by Cord:Use Cord Blood Bank (Orlando, FL). Only pathogen-free cord blood units were used for isolating CB-SCs. Human cord blood-derived stem cells (CB-SCs) were generated as previously described with the following modifications. Cord blood mononuclear cells were plated in serum-free culture medium (Lonza, Walkersville, MD) and incubated at 37 °C, in 8% CO2. After 23 weeks, CB-SCs growing at 8090% confluence were prepared for co-culture with allogeneic lymphocytes.
In preparation for the clinical trial, peripheral blood samples (10 ml per subjects) were obtained from patients before the treatment and at 2, 8, 18, 26 and 56 weeks respectively post-treatment. Cells were incubated with mouse anti-human mAbs (BioLegend, San Diego, CA), including PerCP/Cy5.5-conjugated anti-CD3, PerCP/Cy5.5-conjugated anti-CD4, PE-conjugated anti-CD8, FITC-conjugated anti-CD45RA, PE-conjugated anti-CD45RO, PE-conjugated anti-CD56, APC-conjugated anti-CCR7. To test the percentage and absolute cell numbers of different subsets in peripheral blood, cells were immunostained with BD MultiTEST reagents CD3 FITC/CD8 PE/CD45 PerCP/CD4 APC and CD3 FITC/CD16 + CD56 PE/CD45 PerCP/CD19 APC (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) according to the manufacture's recommended protocols. Isotype-matched mouse anti-human IgG antibodies (Beckman Coulter) served as a negative control for all fluorescein-conjugated IgG mAb. After staining, cells were collected and analyzed using a BD FACScalibur„¢ Cytometer. The final data were analyzed using the CellQuest Pro Software (Becton Dickinson, MD).
For ex vivo studies, flow cytometric analyses were performed as previously described. Cells were stained for 30 min at room temperature and then washed with PBS prior to flow analysis. We used several mouse anti-human monoclonal Abs (mAbs), including APC-AF 750-conjugated anti-CD4, APC-AF 750- or Krome Orange-conjugated anti-CD8, PE- or FITC-conjugated anti-CD45RA, FITC-conjugated anti-CD45RO, ECD-conjugated anti-CD62L, and PE-Cy7-conjugated anti-CCR7. Isotype-matched mouse anti-human IgG antibodies (Beckman Coulter) served as a negative control for all fluorescein-conjugated IgG mAb. After staining, cells were collected and analyzed using a Gallios Flow Cytometer (Beckman Coulter), equipped with 3 lasers (488 nm blue, 638 red, and 405 violet lasers) for the concurrent reading of up to 10 colors. The final data were analyzed using the Kaluza Flow Cytometry Analysis Software (Beckman Coulter).
An intention-to treat approach was used, with 15 patients undergoing SCE therapy. All participants were included in safety analyses. The feasibility of the SCE therapy was assessed by analyzing the number of the patients unable to complete the therapy and the number of patients who were lost to follow-up prior to the 12-month visit. The primary efficacy end points were the change in immune markers between baseline and follow-ups. Statistical analyses of data were performed by the two-tailed paired Student's t-test to determine statistical significance between baseline and follow-ups. Values were given as mean  SD (standard deviation).