The BR9601 trial (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT0003012) investigators recruited 374 pre- and post-menopausal women with completely excised, histologically confirmed breast tumours and a clear indication for adjuvant chemotherapy. Patients were randomised between 8 cycles of CMF (intravenous cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m2, methotrexate 50 mg/m2 and 5-fluorouracil 600 mg/m2) every 21 days, and E-CMF (4 cycles of epirubicin 100 mg/m2 every 21 days followed by 4 cycles of the same CMF regimen) (Additional file 1: Figure S1). The protocol was approved by central and local ethics committees, and each patient provided written informed consent before randomisation. For the present analysis, tissue blocks were retrieved and RNA was extracted. The primary outcomes of the BR9601 study were relapse-free survival and OS, although distant relapse-free survival (DRFS) was also reported.
Breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231, MCF7, ZR-75-1, SKBR3) were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA) and cultured in Dulbeccos modified Eagles medium (except SKBR3, cultured in RPMI 1640 medium) supplemented with 10 % heat-inactivated foetal bovine serum and Gibco 1 %l-glutamine (Thermo Scientific, Burlington, ON, Canada). Epirubicin-resistant cell lines were generated by exposing native cells to increasing concentrations of epirubicin with an initial concentration set at 0.5 nM. Resistance was defined when the half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) value superseded the IC50 value of the corresponding native cell line and resistant cells could not tolerate further increase in drug concentration. Drug resistance and cross-resistance were determined by exposing cells to drug concentrations ranging from 0.3 to 3000 nM for 72 h. Cell viability was determined using the Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8; Dojindo Molecular Technologies/Cedarlane Laboratories, Burlington, ON, Canada). IC50 values were calculated using Prism 5 software (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA).
For cell-cycle analysis, cells were synchronised by the double-thymidine block and incubated with dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) or epirubicin doses established for each cell line: 25 nM for MDA-MB-231, 30 nM for MCF7, 15 nM for SKBR3 and 10 nM for ZR-75-1. Cells were collected at 48 h, fixed with 80 % ethanol and incubated with 2 mg/ml RNase A and 0.1 mg/ml propidium iodide (Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, ON, Canada) before analysis. For apoptosis experiments, cells were treated with DMSO or epirubicin at the concentrations described above and collected at 72 h for staining with annexin V apoptosis detection eFluor 450 (eBioscience, San Diego, CA, USA). Data were collected using a FACSCanto II flow cytometer and FACSDiva software (BD Biosciences, Mississauga, ON, Canada) and analysed using FlowJo software (Treestar, Ashland, OR, USA).
Cells were cultured in the presence or absence of epirubicin for up to 96 h (see Flow cytometry section above for epirubicin concentrations). Cells were collected at 24, 48, 72 and 96 h and counted using a Vi-CELL Cell Viability Analyzer (Beckman Coulter, Mississauga, ON, Canada). Data were analysed using GraphPad Prism 5 software.
Illumina HumanHT-12 v4 BeadChips (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) were used for the whole genome microarray analysis by the UHN Microarray Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada. Total RNA was extracted with the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Toronto, ON, Canada) and used for profiling gene expression changes. Raw data (Gene Expression Omnibus accession number [GEO:GSE54326]) were normalised with the R3.0.0 lumi package using simple scaling normalisation; the 10 % most variable probes were retained for differential analysis using the genefilter package. Differentially expressed probes were identified using limma with a BenjaminiHochberg corrected p value cut-off of 0.05.
To identify functionally relevant modules, genes demonstrating consistent directionality of significant expression changes were analysed using the Cytoscape Reactome Functional Interaction (FI) plugin in Cytoscape 2.8.3. Symbols were loaded as a gene set and interactions from the FI network 2012 version, including FI annotations and linker genes. Network modules were identified using spectral clustering and pathway enrichment computed for each module using the Reactome FI plugin functions. Reactome pathways exhibiting false discovery rate (FDR) values less than 0.01 were considered enriched.
All inhibitors were provided by the drug discovery group at the Ontario Institute for Cancer Research (Toronto, ON, Canada). Cells were seeded at 10001500 cells/well into 384-well plates (Greiner Bio-One, Mississauga, ON, Canada). After 24 h, resistant cells were exposed to epirubicin at the selection doses established (see Flow cytometry section above), then exposed to histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (HDACi) dissolved in DMSO in 12 concentrations ranging from 0.0026 to 10 M using HP D300 digital compound dispenser (Tecan Systems, San Jose, CA, USA). The DMSO concentration did not exceed 0.5 % in the final drug solution. After 72 h, the effects of inhibitors were determined using CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and the Wallac EnVision 2104 Multilabel Reader (PerkinElmer, Woodbridge, ON, Canada). Raw data were normalised to negative (media) and positive (20 M staurosporine) controls and analysed using GraphPad Prism 5.
RNA was isolated from cultured cell lines using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Toronto, ON, Canada). A total of 20 ng of RNA was analysed using TaqMan gene expression assays (HIST1H2BD, Hs00371070_m1; HIST1H2BK, Hs00955067_g1; HIST1H2AC, Hs00185909_m1) and EXPRESS One-Step Superscript qRT-PCR universal kit according to manufacturers protocol (Life Technologies, Burlington, ON, Canada). Reactions were run using Applied Biosystems ViiA 7 Real-Time PCR instrument and software (Life Technologies). Transcript levels were quantified from the standard curve generated from the control Universal Human Reference RNA samples (Agilent, Mississauga, ON, Canada). Statistical significance was determined using an unpaired t test.
Whole-cell lysates (WCL) were prepared in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer supplemented with cOmplete Mini Protease and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitors (Roche, Laval, QC, Canada). For cell line characterisation, 1050 g of total protein was run on 420 % Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Gels (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Mississauga, ON, Canada). For histones, cells were collected in 0.1 % Nonidet P-40 in phosphate-buffered saline to release nuclei. WCL were prepared by adding equal volumes of 2 RIPA buffer supplemented with 25 U of Benzonase Nuclease (Sigma-Aldrich) and cOmplete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), incubating on ice for 30 minutes and sonicating for 15 minutes with 30-second on-off intervals. Twenty micrograms of WCL were run on a 12 % gel. A list of primary antibodies used in immunoblotting is provided in Additional file 1: Table S5. Signals were developed with BM Chemiluminescence Blotting Substrate (POD) (Roche) and a ChemiDoc imaging system (Bio-Rad Laboratories).
For CCK-8 assays, a total of 7104 ZR75-1 epirubicin-resistant cells and MDA-MB-231 epirubicin-resistant cells were transfected with Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Life Technologies) and 10 nM Dharmacon ON-TARGETplus siRNA reagent human SMARTpool (GE Healthcare, Lafayette, CO, USA) targeting HIST1H2AC (L-011435-01-0005), HIST1H2BK (L-013323-02-0005) or both according to the manufacturers instructions. Negative controls included media only, Lipofectamine only or mock transfection with non-targeting small interfering RNA (siRNA; D-001810-10-05). Cells were exposed to 0.33000 nM epirubicin for 72 h before their viability was determined using the CCK-8 kit. For flow cytometric analyses, 2105 cells were plated in 6-well plates and transfected with 10 nM siRNA or control as described above. Samples were collected at 72 h for quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and flow cytometric analyses.
The nCounter gene expression CodeSet (NanoString Technologies, Seattle, WA, USA) included 7 genes within the histone module and 11 additional genes that were identified in the KEGG PATHWAY database as being important for histone function (Additional file 1: Table S6). HIST1H2AC was excluded from the CodeSet because probes cross-hybridised to other genes. All 18 genes were functionally related (Additional file 1: Figure S6). Messenger RNA (mRNA) CodeSets were processed on nCounter according to the manufacturers instructions. Raw mRNA abundance data were pre-processed using the NanoStringNorm R package (v1.1.19; Additional file 2: Methods). A range of pre-processing schemes was assessed to optimise normalisation parameters as previously described (Haider S., Yao C. Q., Sabine V. S., Grzadkowski M., Starmans M. H. W., Wang J., Nguyen F., Moon N. C., Lin X., Drake C., Crozier C. A., Brookes C. L., van de Velde C. J. H., Hasenburg A., Kieback D. G., Markopoulos C. J., Dirix L. Y., Seynaeve C., Rea D. W., Kasprzyk A., Lambin P., Lio P., Bartlett J. M. S., Boutros P. C.: Using pathways for cross-disease biomarker discovery, in preparation).
To assess whether individual genes are prognostic of survival, each gene was median dichotomised into low- and high-expression groups and univariate Cox proportional hazards models were fit (Additional file 1: Figure S7). Survival analysis of clinical variables modelled age as binary variable (dichotomised at age >50 years), while nodal status, pathological grade, ER status and HER2 status were modelled as ordinal variables (Additional file 1: Figure S1B). Tumour size was treated as a continuous variable.
We hypothesised that integrating molecular modules could improve residual risk prediction relative to DRFS and OS. For each module, we calculated a module dysregulation score (Additional file 2: Methods), which we used in a univariate Cox proportional hazards model. A stratified fivefold cross-validation approach was applied, and models were trained in the training cohort and validated in the kth testing cohort using 10-year DRFS as an end point. All survival modelling was performed on DRFS and OS in the R statistical environment with the survival package (v2.37-7). Treatment by marker interaction term was calculated using Cox proportional hazards model.