Fresh HCC specimens, paired adjuvant noncancerous tissue samples and HCC serum samples were obtained from patients undergoing hepatectomy between 2008 and 2010. Serum samples from healthy persons were randomly selected at the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University (Nanjing, China). The study was approved by our Institutional Ethics Committee. Our research was performed in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration and government policies. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. Peripheral blood samples were collected before hepatectomy. Specimens and corresponding clinical and pathological materials are summarized in Table 1 (tissues) and Table 2 (serum).
HCC cell lines SMCC7721 and MHCC97H and common human liver cell line L02 were purchased from American Type Culture Collection, and MHCC97H and Huh7 cells were obtained from the Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology (Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China). The cell lines were routinely cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA) with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA, USA), 2mMl-glutamine, 100U/ml penicillin and 100mg/ml streptomycin, in 5% CO2 at 37°C.
Male BALB/c nu/nu mice (48 weeks old) were purchased from the Laboratory Animal Center of Yangzhou University and maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions. All animals received humane care and all experiments were carried out according to the guidelines outlined in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
Two shRNAs of LINC01225 sequences were designed, shRNA1: GGAUAAUUCUAAUGCCUACTTGUAGGCAUUAGAAUUAUCCTT; shRNA2: UCCAGUUGGCGAGAGUGAUTTAUCACUCUCGCCAACUGGATT. SMCC7721 and MHCC97H cells were transfected with lentivirus plasmid constructed with shRNA of LINC01225 as previously described, and finally shRNA1 plasmid termed lentivirus-short hairpin RNA (Lv-shRNA) was selected to be used in the subsequent experiments. Lentivirus plasmid constructed with scramble sequence was used as control, termed Lv-NC. The synthesized and purified LINC01225 gene fragment was inserted into a lentivirus vector (pll3.7), named Lv-Rescue. LINC01225 knockdown SMCC7721 and MHCC97H cells were then transfected with the packaged recombinant lentivirus. shRNA of EGFR was designed for the target sequence: GGCTGGTTATGTCCTCATT. Lentivirus plasmid constructed with shRNA of EGFR, termed EGFR-shRNA, was used to transform MHCC97H cells as previously described (Supplementary Figure S2).
Quantitative real-time PCR was performed to detect the expression levels of LINC01225 and mRNAs of all related genes with SYBR Green Mastermix kit (TaKaRa, Tokyo, Japan) and analyzed in triplicate assays on the ABI Prism 7900HT (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) according to the direction of the reagents. Total RNAs of fresh liver samples and cells were extracted with TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) and quantified. For RNA extraction from the cytoplast and cytoplasm, the SurePrep Nuclear or Cytoplasmic RNA Purification Kit (Life Science SOURCE; Biovision, Milpitas, CA, USA) was used. For mRNA detection, reverse transcriptase (TaKaRa) was used to reverse transcribe total RNAs (500 ng). Has-5S was used as an internal control. Primer sequences: Has-5S: Forward: 5-GGAGAGGGAGCCTGAGAAACG-3 and Reverse: 5-TTACAGGGCCTCGAAAGAGTCC-3 and human LINC01225: Forward: 5-GTCCCTTACCTTGAGGTGCC-3 and Reverse: 5-CACGCCTTTGTGTTCTGGTG-3 and human EGFR: Forward: 5-TCCTCTGGAGGCTGAGAAAA-3 and Reverse: 5-GGGCTCTGGAGGAAAAGAAA-3 were designed using Primer 3.0 software (http://www.simgene.com/Primer3).
Total proteins from cultured cells were extracted using radio-immunoprecipitation assay buffer plus fresh protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Beyotime, Nantong, China) and quantified with the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Equal amounts of protein samples (30g) were loaded to each lane. Proteins were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and then transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane. Antibodies against EGFR (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), Ras (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), Raf-1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), p-Raf-1 (Thr269) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), MEK (Cell Signaling Technology), phosphorylated MEK (p-MEK; Cell Signaling Technology), p44/42 (ERK) (Cell Signaling Technology), p-p44/42 (Thr202/Tyr204) (Cell Signaling Technology) and human reduced glyceraldehyde-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) (Cell Signaling Technology) were used in immunoblotting. ImageJ software (NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA) was applied to quantify the integrated density of the bands. Cells suffering freezing and freezethaw cycles were used to extract protein for ELISA assay, which was performed with an ELISA Kit for EGFR (Uscn Life Science Inc., Wuhan, China) according to the instruction.
Apoptosis was detected with an Annexin V-FITC/PI Apoptosis Detection Kit (Vazyme Biotech, Nanjing, China) and cell cycle was determined with a Cell cycle Assay Kit (Vazyme Biotech). Cells used for apoptosis detection were treated with 0.05mM H2O2 for 2h for stimulation of apoptosis. Cells were finally analyzed on a FACS Calibur flow cytometer equipped with CellQuest software (BD Biosciences, New York, NY, USA).
Cell proliferation was evaluated using a CCK8 kit (Vazyme Biotech) and a Cell-Light EdU Apollo567 In Vitro Kit (RiboBio, Guangzhou, China). For CCK8 detection, transfected cells (2  103) were seeded into 96-well plates, cultured for 24, 48, 72 and 96h, and then CCK8 reagent was added to each well and incubated for 2h at 37°C. Absorption was measured by microplate reader at 450nm (ELX-800; Bio-Tek, Winooski, VT, USA). For 5-ethynyl-2-deoxyuridine (EdU) assay, transfected cells (2  105) were seeded into Glass Botttom Cell Culture Dishes (Nest Biotechnology, NJ, USA), then cells were treated according manufacture instruction, and finally cell samples were detected with a laser confocal scanning microscopy. The invasion assays were assessed using the Transwell units (Corning Costar, Tewksbury, MA, USA) percolated with Matrigel (BD Biosciences). Cells (2  104 cells/well) were seeded at the upper compartment of the chamber in DMEM without FBS, and the lower chamber was filled with DMEM including 10% FBS as chemotaxin. After incubation for 48h, the filters were collected, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and stained with 0.1% crystal violet. Non-invading tumor cells on the top of the filters were removed with cotton swabs. Cells passing through the filter were counted under a light microscopy.
Cells (5  106) with a stably decreased level of LINC01225 expression in SMCC7721 and MHCC97H and control cells (Lv-NC) were subcutaneously implanted into the bilateral axillae of each BALB/C nude mice. Five weeks later, all mice were killed and the weight of each tumor was measured. Tumor tissues were integrally stripped out.
A single-cell suspension was prepared with the cells stably knocked down for LINC01225, or in the control group, suspended in 200l PBS and filtered through a sterile 70-m nylon mesh filter (BD Falcon, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). Groups of 10 mice were separately injected with SMCC7721 and MHCC97H cells with or without knockdown of LINC01225 via tail vein injection to develop peripheral intravascular implanted models (10 in each group). Mice were killed 5 weeks afterwards, and tumor metastasis in the lung was examined. H&E staining was used to evaluate the number of tumors in lung tissues.
In addition, a tumor model of intraperitoneal transplantation in BALB/C nude mice was constructed. Mice were injected intraperitoneally with cells treated with LINC01225 shRNA or controls and kept in pathogen-free conditions. Abdominal metastasis was monitored weekly by the IVIS Lumina II system (Caliper Life Sciences, Hopkinton, MA, USA).
Agarose powder (0.5g) was dissolved in 50ml of 0.5% Tris-acetate-EDTA (TAE) buffer and heated to near boiling, and then 2.5l GoldView (Beyotime) was added and mixed. Total RNA of the cell lines was extracted and reverse transcribed into cDNAs. Obtained cDNAs were mixed with loading buffer (Beyotime), and the mixture was loaded into the wells. Electrophoresis was performed with 0.5% TAE as the running buffer, at 80V for 40min. Data were analyzed with Image Lab software performed with an ultraviolet (UV) transilluminator.
Total RNAs extracted from MHCC97H cells including untreated cells, LINC01225 stable knockdown cells and mock empty plasmid of PLL3.7-treated cells were amplified and used to synthesize double-stranded cDNAs. Samples prepared as required were labeled and hybridized to mRNA Human Gene Expression Microarray V4.0 (CapitalBio Corp., Beijing, China). The microarray results were used to analyze data normalization, summarization and quality control with the GeneSpring software V11.5 (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). We selected genes that were differentially expressed with a >2-fold change of threshold value, as well as BenjaminiHochberg corrected P-values of <0.05. CLUSTER version 3.0 software (Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA) was used to normalize and hierarchically cluster the data. Tree visualization of the data was performed with Java Treeview software (Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA). Microarray data have been deposited at ArrayExpress (E-MTAB-3833).
Gene product attributes were described with three structured networks of defined terms provided with GO analysis from Gene Ontology (www.geneontology.org). The GO Term enrichment with expressed mRNA list was considered significantly different with P<0.05. Pathway analysis was performed on the basis of the latest KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) database for the differentially expressed mRNAs with a statistically significant P-value of <0.05.
Polyacrylamide gel was prepared in accordance with the standard protocol. Twenty microliters of each sample mixed with 10  running buffer (CapitalBio Corp.) was loaded, and the gel was run at 120V for 2.5h. The gel was stained with Fast Silver Stain Kit (Beyotime). Lanes, cut into 10 pieces were respectively placed in Eppendorf tubes. NH4HCO3 (50mM) was added and the gel was broken into pieces with the suction pipette. Then, trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) was used to digest the gel solution at 37°C overnight. Tubes were shaken and centrifuged with methyl cyanide (HPLC grade) added for 2min at room temperature. The supernatant was transferred to the clean tubes, and dried by the vacuum concentration apparatus at 60°C. LC-MS/MS with nano-LC combined with an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used for analysis of the peptides followed by a scan range of m/z 4001500. Thermo Proteome Discoverer (1.4.0.288) software (http://www.thermoscientific.com/en/product/proteome-discoverer-software.html) platform was used to analyze the raw files. MS/MS spectra were retrieved against the protein database (human-refseq-20140303-71465s.fasta, National Center of Biotechnology Information) for protein authentication.
RIP was performed with a Magna RIP RNA-Binding Protein Immunoprecipitation Kit (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). An antibody for EGFR (Cell Signaling Technology) was used for RIP assays. Coprecipitated RNAs were detected using quantitative real-time PCR.
Results of quantitative real-time PCR were expressed as meanS.E.M. Student's t-test and Ï2 test were used to evaluate statistical differences in clinical and demographic characteristics. KaplanMeier survival curves were drawn and the log-rank test was performed. Risk score analysis was done to investigate the effectiveness of the LINC01225 for prediction. Statistical analysis was performed using STATA version 9.2 (Stata Corp., College Station, TX, USA) and SPSS version 18.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) and presented with the GraphPad prism software (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). In all cases, P<0.05 was considered significant.
HCC
hepatocellular carcinoma
lncRNA
long noncoding RNA
EGFR
epidermal growth factor receptor
MEK
mitogen-activated protein kinase/p44/42 kinase
ERK
extracellular signal-regulated kinase
MAPK
mitogen-activated protein kinase
RIP
RNA immunoprecipitation
shRNAs
short hairpin RNAs
Lv-shRNA
lentivirus-short hairpin RNA
GAPDH
glyceraldehyde-phosphate dehydrogenase
ELISA
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
IOD
integral optical density
The authors declare no conflict of interest.