Collection of human gingival tissue was approved by the IRB in Chonnam National University Dental Hospital (approved No.CNUDH-2013-001). Gingival tissue biopsies from human patients were collected with informed consent from Chonnam National University Dental Hospital of Korea between 2013 and 2015. Written informed consent was obtained for all subjects after the nature and possible consequences of the studies were explained. All participants were adults without periodontal disease.
The inflammatory status of each gingival tissue sample was assessed by a dentist, and biopsies from sites judged as healthy were included in this study. Biopsies were stored in liquid nitrogen (LN2) immediately after collection. Information on the samples is provided in S1 Table.
Primary human gingival fibroblasts (hGFs) were prepared from gingival tissues of adult participants without periodontal disease, as described by Min et al.. hGFs were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagles medium (DMEM; Gibco BRL, Grand Island, NY, USA) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (PAA Laboratories, Etobicoke, Ontario, Canada), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 g/ml streptomycin (Gibco BRL) at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. When confluent, the cells were trypsinized using 0.25% trypsin/0.02% EDTA solution (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). In vitro aging of hGFs was performed by sequential subcultivations (young, 4 population doublings; old, 22 population doublings) and validated using -galactosidase staining to detect senescent cells.
Fusobacterium nucleatum subsp. polymorphum ATCC10953 was cultured in an anaerobic chamber (85% N2, 5% CO2 and 10% H2) at 37°C in tryptic soy broth (TSB) supplemented with 5 g/ml hemin (Sigma) and 1 g/ml menadione (Sigma). Bacteria were collected by centrifugation (7,000  g, 10 min), washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and adjusted to 108 CFU/ml in buffer based on matching the optical density (OD) to a reference standard. For enumeration, bacteria were subjected to anaerobic culture in TSB supplemented with 1.5% agar (Sigma), 5% sterile defibrinated sheep blood, 5 g/ml hemin and 1 g/ml menadione.
Young and old hGFs were infected with F. nucleatum (MOI = 10) and incubated for 0.5, 2, 6, and 12 h. The cells were harvested at the indicated time points for RNA extraction.
Total RNA was isolated using an RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. RNA quantity and quality were assessed with an Epoch Microplate Spectrophotometer (Biotek, Winooski, VT, USA).
For each total RNA sample, 4 g was subjected to purification of poly-A transcripts and generation of libraries with multiplexed barcode adaptors, using the appropriate TrueSeq sample preparation kits (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). All samples passed quality control analysis on a Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), and paired-end reads (2  100 bp) were generated with a HiSeq 2000 sequencing system (Illumina).
Reference genome sequence data from Homo sapiens were obtained from the University of California Santa Cruz Genome Browser Gateway (assembly ID: hg19). The reference genome index was built using the Bowtie2-build component of Bowtie2 (ver. 2.0) and SAMtools (ver. 0.1.18). Tophat2 (ver. 2.0) was applied to map the reads obtained from our tissue samples to the reference genome. The fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads (FPKM) values were used to estimate the expression level of each gene. The FPKM data were normalized by the quantile method, log2-transformed, and median-centered across genes and samples. Using normalized FPKM data, we applied a hierarchical cluster analysis, taking the centered correlation coefficient as the measure of similarity and performing complete linkage clustering. To assess the significance of differences in gene expression between sample groups, we used the EdgeR package with a negative binomial model to select differentially expressed genes from the count data. Differences in gene expression were considered statistically significant if the p value was < 0.001 and the fold difference in expression between two sample groups was ¥ 2. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using the Ingenuity Pathway tool (ver. 8.0; Ingenuity Systems, Redmond City, CA, USA), and the significance of over-represented gene sets was estimated using Fishers exact test.
The amplified genes and utilized primers are listed in S2 Table. Total RNA was reverse-transcribed using a PrimeScript„¢ RT Reagent Kit (TaKaRa, Tokyo, Japan) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Real-time quantitative PCR was performed using an ABI Prism 7300 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and the SYBR Green Master Mix (TaKaRa). All data were normalized with respect to -actin, and expressed as the relative fold ratio for control (young sample) by a formulation using 2-CT method.
The activity of proteolytic enzymes was evaluated using gelatin or casein zymography following the electrophoretic separation of lysates from young and old human gingival tissues (n = 3 individuals per group; S1 Table). Briefly, gingival tissues (30 mg) were mixed with homogenization buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 150 mM NaCl, and 1% Triton X-100) and homogenized with a pestle on ice, and lysates were collected by centrifugation (5,000  g, 10 min, 4°C). Twenty micrograms of unheated and non-denatured protein were subjected to 0.1% gelatin (Sigma) or 0.1% -casein (Sigma)-containing SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Gels were washed in renaturing buffer (2.5% Triton X-100) and incubated in Novex zymogram developing buffer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) for 16 h at 37°C. Gels were stained with 0.2% Coomassie brilliant blue R (Sigma) for 1 h and then destained in 20% methanol and 10% glacial acetic acid. Gelatinolytic and caseinolytic activities were detected as white areas against a blue background. The areas were quantified with the CS Analyzer 4.0 software (ATTO Co., Tokyo, Japan).
Statistical analysis was performed using the SPSS 17.0 software package (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). All data were analyzed using t tests, values of p < 0.05 were considered significant.