Six men were recruited to a double-blind, randomized crossover study. Inclusion criteria were as follows: aged 1835 years, BMI 18.525 kg/m2, no acute or chronic medical conditions, on no regular medications, alcohol intake 21 units per week, no claustrophobia, and normal screening blood tests (full blood count, glucose, kidney, liver, and thyroid function). Participants were randomized to receive three doses of 10 mg prednisolone or placebo 12 hr apart prior to each study visit (at 0800 hr and 2000 hr the day prior to each study visit and at 0800 hr on the morning of the study visit). Volunteers were instructed to avoid alcohol or exercise for 48 hr prior to each visit. Volunteers attended the Clinical Research Facility at the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh after overnight fast in standard light clothing and wore identical clothing at each visit. Subjects were placed in a room at 23°C24°C (warm room), and measurements were performed of height, weight, fat mass, and blood pressure, and fasting blood samples were collected for glucose, insulin, ACTH, cortisol, and NEFAs.
An infusion of 6,6-[2H]2-glucose was commenced at 0.22 mol/kg/min for 180 min following an initial bolus of 17.6 mol/kg (Figure 1A). Volunteers then remained at rest in the warm room for 2 hr. Thereafter, subjects were transferred to the Clinical Research Imaging Centre and were placed supine in a room cooled to 17°C (cold room) for 2 hr. Subjects were checked every 15 min for signs or symptoms of shivering. Following 1 hr in the cold room, subjects were given an intravenous injection of 75 MBq 18FDG. The PET scan commenced 1 hr following the 18FDG injection, after a CT scan for attenuation correction. Subjects were then allowed to return home and attended for a second visit after at least 2 weeks washout. All studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by the South East Scotland Research Ethics Committee, and informed consent was obtained from all participants.
Nine lean, healthy subjects (four female, five male) were recruited to a double-blind, randomized crossover study. Inclusion criteria were identical to the PET study except for additional inclusion criteria for the female participants: no current pregnancy and alcohol intake 14 units per week. Participants were randomized to receive identical dosing as in the PET study, taking three doses of 10 mg prednisolone or placebo 12 hr apart prior to each study visit, and the study protocol was identical to the PET study except for the following differences. Subjects were placed on a bed in a warm room (23°C24°C) at t = 0 min for the first 2 hr (Figure 1B). At t + 110 min, subjects placed their hands in cold water (15°C) in an attempt to activate their BAT. At t + 120 min, volunteers were moved to a room cooled to 16°C (cold room) for a further 2 hr to more robustly activate their BAT. Every 20 min from t = 0 onward, each subjects peripheral temperature was measured using a temperature probe applied to the dorsum of the hand (YSI 409 series, Henleys Medical Supplies Ltd), while thermal imaging was performed of the neck and upper body region. Energy expenditure was measured each hour using indirect calorimetry. At the end of the 4 hr protocol, subjects were allowed to return home and attended for their second visit either 2 weeks (in males) or 4 weeks (in females, to ensure menstrual cycle in the same phase at each visit) later to allow adequate washout between phases.
All subjects were placed supine in a hybrid PET/CT scanner (Biograph mCT, Siemens Medical Systems). Subjects underwent an initial low-dose CT for attenuation correction (non-enhanced, 120 kV) with tube current modulation applied (20 [in healthy volunteers] or 50 [in patients] mAs quality reference) followed by static PET imaging of the upper body using 10 (volunteers) or 3 (patients) min beds. Images were analyzed using PMOD version 3.409 (PMOD technologies). 18FDG uptake by BAT was quantified by measuring the mean standard uptake value (SUV) from all pixels with an SUV of greater than 2-fold background (>2.0), which corresponded to tissues with a radio density on the CT scan with Hounsfield unit (HU) values within the expected range for adipose tissue (from 150 to 30 HU). The total 18FDG uptake by BAT was calculated as the mean SUV multiplied by the volume of active BAT.
Thermal imaging was performed using a FLIR T650sc infrared camera. The camera was placed 1 m from the subject and the subjects upper body was photographed at the intervals described in Figure 1B. Identically sized regions of interest were drawn around the right and left supraclavicular regions and the anterior chest as shown in Figure 3A using Research IR version 4 (FLIR). The mean and maximum supraclavicular (left and right) and chest temperatures were recorded from each image, and the mean values from all images taken during each condition (warm, cold water, and cold exposure) are presented in the results. The results using the mean of the mean and the mean of the maximum were similar; as such, only the mean of the mean is presented.
Energy expenditure was measured for 15 min each hour using a ventilated-hood indirect calorimeter (GEM Nutrition). The first 5 min of data were discarded and the mean value for the final 10 min recorded each hour. Energy expenditure (EE) is presented as the mean of two values obtained during warm and cold exposure. Cold-induced thermogenesis was calculated by subtracting the mean EE in the cold room from the EE in the warm room.
Endogenous and 6,6-[2H]2-glucose were measured using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry as previously described. The mean concentration of D2-glucose at room temperature (from t + 90 to t + 120 min) and during the first hour of cold exposure (from t + 150 to 180 min) was used to calculate the metabolic clearance rate (MCR) of glucose using the equation MCR = D2-glucose infusion rate/ [mean D2-glucose].
ACTH, insulin (DRG Instruments), and noradrenaline concentrations (LDN) were measured using commercially available ELISA kits. NEFAs were measured using a colorimetric assay (Wako Diagnostics). Cortisol was measured by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry as previously described.
Detailed in the Supplemental Information.
Data are presented as mean  SEM. Comparisons between two related groups were examined using the paired t test for normally distributed data, and using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test for data not normally distributed. Comparisons involving three or more groups were analyzed using repeated-measures ANOVA with post hoc testing using Bonferroni correction. Associations were tested using Pearsons correlation coefficient with Bonferroni correction. Data were tested for normal distribution using the one-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. p < 0.05 was considered significant. Data were analyzed using SPSS version 19.