This study was carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of Chongqing Medical University. The study was also registered at chictr.org (Registration number: CHICTR- OCC-11001422, Date of Registration: 23-June-2011). An informed consent was obtained from all participants in this study.
This study was a two-center, prospective, double-blinded, randomized, placebo-controlled study that took place at the Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University Chongqing, and the affiliated Hospital, Zunyi Medical University, Guizhou, China. This trial included 180 patients with T2DM and 100 normal subjects and was conducted from February 2012 to December 2013. The diagnosis of T2DM was based on World Health Organization 1998 diagnostic criteria. Subjects with T2DM were newly diagnosed and had not been treated with oral hypoglycemic agents or diet control. Inclusion criteria were age 4075 yr, with BMI of 2040kg/m2 and HbA1c levels between 6.5 and 9.0%. Exclusions included patients with type 1 diabetes or ketoacidosis, malignant disease in the previous 10 yr, liver cirrhosis, hypertension, hepatic and renal failure, or other known major diseases. 180 patients with T2DM were randomized (DAPA: placebo, 2:1) by using a computer-generated random- number sequence (simple randomization). Before breakfast, patients were administered with DAPA (AstraZeneca, n=120) 10mg once daily, or placebo (n=60) once daily for 3 months. 162 patients (DAPA: n=117; placebo: n=45) completed week 12, and 18 discontinued. Treatment allocation was blinded to patients and study personnel until the database was unlocked for analysis. All patients were in good general health without evidence of cardiac, hepatic, renal, or other chronic diseases as determined by history, examination, and screening blood tests. Participants were requested to adhere to pre-study lifestyle and dietary habits throughout the course of the study. The dietary information was recorded from these subjects during the study. To maintain the compliance of patients, subjects were contacted by phone weekly to collect information on blood glucose and adverse effects. Study drug adherence was assessed at each study visit by pill count and calculated as percentage of pills taken. The adherence rates were 90%. 100 age-matched healthy subjects without clinical evidence of major disease were recruited from an unselected population that underwent routine medical check-ups and were used as controls. These subjects had FBG levels <6.1mmol/L and a 2-h oral glucose tolerance tests (OGTT) glucose levels <7.8mmol/L, had no family history of T2DM, and were not using medications. To prevent acute complication, subjects with three consecutive FBG values >13mmol/L were withdrawn from the study. This study was carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of Chongqing Medical University. The study was also registered at chictr.org (CHICTR-OCC-11001422). An informed consent was obtained from all participants in this study.
Anthropometric measurement was performed in the morning, before breakfast, with the subjects wearing light clothing, without shoes. Body weight and height were measured in all subjects using a scale and a wall mounted stadiometer to the nearest 0.5kg and 0.5cm respectively. Waist and hip circumferences were measured, and the WHR was calculated. BMI was calculated as weight divided by height squared. The FAT % was measured by bioelectrical impedance (BIA-101; RJL Systems, Shenzhen, China). The HOMA-IR=fasting insulin (FIns, microunits per milliliter) FBG (millimoles per liter)/22.5. Plasma glucose and HbAlc were measured immediately by the glucose oxidase method and anion exchange high-performance liquid chromatography, respectively. After 10h overnight fasting, blood samples were collected, serum and plasma were isolated (EDTA) and stored at 80°C for the measurements of ZAG, insulin, ADI, FFA, and blood fat levels.
Circulating ZAG levels were determined with an ELISA obtained from RayBiotech, Inc. (Wuhan, China) following the manufacturers protocol. The limit of detection was 21pg/mL, and intra- assay and inter-assay variations were <10% and <15, respectively. Circulating ADI level was also measured by ELISA as we previously described. The limit of detection was 1.102ng/mL, and intra-assay and inter-assay variations were <5% and 10%, respectively. Insulin was measured by RIA using human insulin as standard (Institute of Atomic Energy, China) according to previous report. FFAs were measured with a commercial kit (Randox Laboratories Ltd., Antrim, UK). Circulating TNF levels were measured by ELISA (4A Biotech Co. Ltd, Beijing, China). ALT and AST levels in serum were measured by an auto-analyzer (Hitachi High-Technologies Corp., Tokyo, Japan). TC, HDL-C, LDL-C, and TG were determined enzymatically using an autoanalyzer (Hitachi 747; Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan).
Mice 3T3-L1 preadipocytes and human hepatoma cells (HepG2) were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC; Manassas, VA). 3T3-L1 preadipocytes were cultured and induced to be differentiated to mature adipocytes as previously described. HepG2 cells were cultured in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% fetal serum and 1% antibiotics. The glucose concentration of the DMEM medium was 25mmol/L. For study on the regulation of ZAG ADI expression and secretion, HepG2 or 3T3-L1 cells were treated with 0.1% DMSO or DAPA at various concentrations (0.8, 4, 20, 30M) for 24hr. The supernatants and cell lysates were collected and stored at 80°C until analysis. For studying the effects of DAPA on lipid metabolism in vitro, HepG2 cells were starved in serum-free medium containing 0.5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 12h, and then treated with 300M palmitic acid (PA) with or without 4M DAPA/100M metformin, a positive control, for 24h. Cell lysates were collected for ZAG and gene related fat metabolism mRNA assay. For study on the regulation of inflammatory cytokine induced by DAPA in vitro, HepG2 cells and differentiated 3T3-L1 adipocytes were treated with 0.013% DMSO and 4M DAPA for 24h. For study of PPAR signaling in vitro, HepG2 cells were treated with 2M DAPA or 0.013% DMSO for 2h, then incubated with or without GW9662 (Sigma), a PPAR inhibitor, for 24h. Cell lysates were collected for expression assay. For intracellular TG content measurement, HepG2 cells were homogenized and supernatants were collected. TG contents were by a spectrophotometric procedure and HepG2 cells were stained with Oil-Red-O as previously described.
Total RNA was extracted with Trizol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturers instructions. Purified RNA was used as the template for first-strand cDNA synthesis with the PrimerScript TM RT reagent Kit (Takara Bio, Otsu, Japan). Quantitative realtime PCR was performed with a SYBR Premix Ex Taq II kit (Takara Bio), and a Corbett Rotor Gene 6000 real-time PCR system (Corbett Research, Sydney, Australia), according to the manufacturers instructions. Gene expression levels were analyzed with the comparative Ct method, and normalized with -actin. Forward and reverse primer pairs are as listed in Supplemental Table 1.
The cell lysates and medium were collected 24h after treatment. Protein concentration was measured with a BCA protein quantification kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA). Proteins (50g per lane) were separated by SDS/PAGE, and then transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes. Immunoblots were blocked in NaCl/Tris/Tween-20 and 5% skimmed milk for 2h, at room temperature and incubated with primary antibodies, including: anti-PPAR- and anti-phospho-HSL (1: 1000 dilution; Cell Signaling Technology), anti-ADI (1: 1000 dilution; Abcam), anti-ZAG, anti-HSL and anti--actin (1: 500 dilution; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), overnight at 4°C. Following three consecutive 5-min washes in NaCl/Tris/Tween-20, blots were incubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody for 1h at room temperature. After two washes in NaCl/Tris/Tween-20 and a final wash in NaCl/Tris, the blots were scanned with the Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (LICOR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, USA), and quantification of antigenantibody complexes was performed with QUANTITY ONE (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).
Statistical analysis was carried out using SPSS 8.0 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). Data are expressed as meanSD unless stated otherwise. Variables with a non-normal distribution were transformed logarithmically before analysis. Comparisons between groups were performed by unpaired t test. Differences between values before and after treatment (i.e. within the placebo and within the DAPA groups) were analyzed using the paired Students t test at time 0 and 12 wk. All t-tests were two tailed and P<0.05 was considered statistically significant. All statistical analyses were performed by a single operator who was blinded to treatment group. Simple and multiple regression analyses were used to examine the association between baseline ZAG and/or DIA levels and the changes of other biomarkers at pre- and post- treatment. The chosen covariates for adjustment included age, BMI and sex. In the vitro study, the data were analyzed by 1-way ANOVA and a post-hoc Tukeys analysis or by a t-test as appropriate.
How to cite this article: Liao, X. et al. Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) Inhibitor Increases Circulating Zinc-A2-Glycoprotein Levels in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes. Sci. Rep. 6, 32887; doi: 10.1038/srep32887 (2016).