Peripheral blood samples were obtained from patients with CLL enrolled on the phase 1 clinical trial of duvelisib receiving dose ranging from 875 mg BID (study IPI-145-02; ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01476657). The study enrollment completed in January 2014 and included 55 patients with relapsed/refractory (R/R) CLL and 18 patients with treatment-na¯ve disease. From these patients, 42 paired (baseline and after 7 days of therapy C1D8) were used for RNA seq and nanostring assays (Supplemental Table 1). For RT-PCR, microfluidic chip, RPPA and immunoblot assays, baseline and C1D28 samples were obtained from 16 patients that were treated at MDACC (Supplemental Table 2). These samples were also used for ex vivo incubations with ibrutinib, idelalisib, duvelisib, and venetoclax. Generally, for patients treated with duvelisib therapy, lymphocytosis was observed by week 1 and was maintained almost in all patients until week 4. We selected these time points to determine early and late changes in mRNA and protein levels.
For in-vitro study, freshly isolated peripheral blood samples were obtained from CLL patients who were not on duvelisib clinical trial (n=5).
All patients signed written informed consent forms in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and the protocols were approved by the institutional review boards of all clinical sites, including MDACC.
Lymphocytes were isolated from PBMCs and cultured in RPMI-1640 medium (HyClone Laboratories, UT) as described before but with 10% human serum (Sigma-Aldrich, MO). CLL cells had a purity above 90% and were seeded at 1  106 cells per well in 24-well plates. All experiments were performed with fresh samples, and a time-matched control incubated with vehicle (DMSO) was used for each sample.
For RNAseq experiments, samples were available from 42 CLL patients on the IPI-145-02 trial at baseline (pre-treatment) and C1D8. RNA was extracted using the Direct-zol Miniprep kit (Zymo Research, #R2050). The samples were shipped to Expression Analysis Inc. (Morrisville, NC) for further processing and sequencing. Based on data quality filters, 31-paired samples were suitable for further analyses. Detailed procedure, data alignment, processing, and analysis are described in the supplemental methods. For further validation, the CLL whole blood RNA sample pairs (baseline and C1D8) were also sent to Labcorp Inc. (Seattle. WA) for gene expression analysis of a custom-made gene panel using NanoStrings nCounter GEx technology.
To determine mRNA expression of the BCL2 family at baseline and C2D1 in the MDACC subset of CLL patients, a TaqMan Human Apoptosis Array (microfluidic card; Applied Biosystems) was used. To further verify, Real-time RT-PCR assay was done in the same 5 samples.
To determine the protein expression of the BCL2 family, reverse phase protein arrays (RPPA) were performed (n=16) at MDACC Core facility. The first RPPA batch (n=7 samples) tested 141 proteins including the BCL2 family members - BAD.pS112, BAX, BCL-XL, BCL2, and BIM. The second batch (n=9 samples) tested 300 proteins including the additional BCL2 family members BAD.pS155, BAK, BFL1, BID, MCL1, and PUMA. For further validation, immunoblots were performed as described, (Supplemental Table 3). Protein band quantification was done using a LI-COR Odyssey CLx Infrared Imaging System.
CLL cells isolated from blood of patients during duvelisib therapy were treated with various pharmacological agents for 24 hours. Sources of these agents are listed in Supplemental Table 3. Cell viability was measured through Annexin V/PI assay followed by flow cytometry.
For in-vitro study, freshly isolated peripheral blood samples were obtained from CLL patients who were not on duvelisib clinical trial (n=5). CLL cells were seeded at 1  106 cells/well and treated with either DMSO, 10 g/mL IgM or a cytokine cocktail containing 1g/mL sCD40L, 10 ng/mL IL-10, and IL-2 for 4 days. Our previous study in CLL cells has demonstrated activation of BCR pathway through these stimulation and inhibition of this activation by duvelisib. Cells were either untreated or treated with duvelisib for 4 days. Each culture was treated with or without 0.510 nM ABT-199 for 1216 hours and apoptosis was measured. Cell viability was measured through Annexin V/PI assay.
Correlations were derived using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA). Statistical tests are indicated in the figure legends. P values were determined using an unpaired or paired students t-test. Statistical analyses are based on linear values and for which log 2 data was converted to fold change except for RNAseq and nanostring data where log2 values were compared for statistical analyses. Since same assays were used for statistical comparison, the variance is expected to be similar between the groups that are being statistically compared.