A previously healthy 48-year-old woman developed metastatic disease three months after primary tumor resection of uterine leiomyosarcoma and was enrolled in a multi-disease phase II study of pembrolizumab monotherapy (10 mg/kg every 2 weeks) (KEYNOTE-028). She received no adjuvant systemic or radiation therapies prior to pembrolizumab. After four doses of pembrolizumab over two months, marked tumor regression was observed at a large right retroperitoneal subhepatic site and numerous other locations, while a peritoneal tumor in the mesentery of the small bowel continued to grow, albeit at a slower rate. After 9 months of treatment, the resistant lesion and responding sites were resected. Pathology of the subhepatic, pembrolizumab-responsive tumor site demonstrated dense and collagenous tissue with foreign body giant cell reaction, granuloma, and hemosiderin-laden macrophages. The treatment-resistant mesenteric tumor demonstrated a 9.0cm myxoid leiomyosarcoma involving the bowel wall, which was highly mitotic (117 cells/10 high-power fields) with necrosis (up to 20% tumor volume) and tissue hemorrhage. No tumor tissue remained for sampling in the treatment-responsive lesion, but a sample from the treatment-resistant tumor was taken for genomic comparison with the primary uterine tumor and germline blood. The clinical trial of pembrolizumab was sponsored by Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp. (NCT02054806) and approved by the institutional review board of the Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center. The patient provided written informed consent for molecular profiling (DFCI Protocol #11-104).
Whole exome and transcriptome sequencing and quality control of tumor and germline samples were performed as previously described. Tumor-specific somatic point mutations, small insertions and deletions (indels), copy-number alterations, and neoantigens were identified by standard genomic analysis pipelines. Mutational clonality (presence of a mutation in all sampled tumor cells versus a subclonal tumor population), tumor purity, and tumor ploidy were assessed using ABSOLUTE, and used as inputs for phylogenetic analyses. For purposes of neoantigen prediction, all six 4-digit patient HLA alleles were inferred from germline WES using Polysolver. All tumor-specific 9- and 10-amino-acid peptides generated by nonsynonymous tumor-specific nonsynonymous somatic point mutations and small insertions and deletions were stored in a FASTA file and then assessed for strength of binding to each of the patients 6 HLA alleles using NetMHCpan-2.4. Any 9- or 10-amino-acid peptide with predicted binding affinity to any HLA allele with IC50  500nM was considered a neoantigen, such that one nonsynonymous mutation could theoretically generate many neoantigens. HLA binding affinity to tumor-specific neoantigens was further confirmed using NetMHCpan-3.0. A neoantigen was considered expressed if gene-level TPM exceeded 1 by RSEM. All sequencing data is available at dbGap accession number phs000694.
Whole exome mutation annotation files and whole transcriptome mRNASeq gene expression files for the TCGA sarcoma cohort were downloaded from Firebrowse (data version 2016_01_28). RNA-seq from matched normal tissue was excluded. Copy number loss, gain, and amplification and oncogenic alterations in MYC and PTEN were defined in accordance with TCGA standards (http://firebrowse.org, http://www.cbioportal.org).
PBMCs were obtained with the patients consent following resection of the treatment-resistant metastatic lesion and evaluated for reactivity to 7 synthetic in silico predicted neoantigens and their wildtype analogs using standard protocols. Tumor-specific and wild-type peptides were synthesized by GenScript USA Inc. Briefly, healthy donor or patient-derived PBMCs were stimulated with 10 g/mL of mutant peptides for 10 or 12 days in the presence of IL-2 and IL-15. Cells were washed and then re-stimulated with monocyte-derived dendritic cells pulsed with the same concentration of either mutant or wildtype peptides for 24 hours or PMA and Ionomycin for 6 hours. Protein transport inhibitor cocktail (Golgi plug/stop) was added in the last 5 hours of culture. Cells were acquired using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) on BD LSRFortessa (BD Biosciences) prior to staining for interferon-. Data were analyzed with Flowjo software (Tree Star).
All statistical analyses were done using R version 3.2.3. Students t-tests with unequal variances were used for all comparisons of continuous variables between groups. All tests were two-tailed with an alpha level of 0.05.