The subjects in this study have been described before. Briefly, the discovery cohort comprised fifteen obese women (body mass index (BMI) >30kg/m2) and fourteen never-obese healthy control women (BMI <30kg/m2) who were recruited in association with planned visits to our surgical units for gastric by-pass surgery because of obesity and through local advertisement for the purpose of studying WAT factors regulating body weight. Clinical data are presented in Table 1. All 14 never-obese women were healthy. Three of the obese women had type 2 diabetes, out of which two were treated with diet and metformin, and one subject with diet alone. CpG methylation of examined CpG-sites did not differ significantly between metformin treated and other women. For six CpG-sites methylation beta-values in the metformin treated women were within the interval defined by the average+SD for the women not treated with metformin; for remaining three CpG-sites the methylation beta-value of 1¥ subject was outside this region, but not in a consistent direction. Overall, this suggests that metformin does not influence methylation of PLIN1. Nine of the obese individuals were treated for hypertension and one patient had stable multiple sclerosis and did not receive any drugs. The women undergoing gastric by-pass surgery participated in a trial on the effect of bariatric surgery (NCT01785134 at www.clinicaltrials.gov) and were investigated before surgery. The study was approved by the regional ethics board in Stockholm and written informed consent was obtained from each subject. The experiments conformed to the principles set out in the WMA Declaration of Helsinki and the Department of Health and Human Services Belmont Report.
Transcriptome analysis on WAT specimens was conducted for 18 of the above individuals (9 obese, and 9 never-obese). For the remaining subjects included in this study we did not have sufficient amount of WAT for transcriptome analysis.
For validation of PLIN1 results we studied an independent group of women with a wide variation in BMI (n=69, age 4012 years, BMI 30.9+9.3kg/m2) who were examined in the same manner as the explorative cohort. Global transcriptome profiles was available on subcutaneous WAT from 57 of these women as reported.
Participants were investigated at 8 AM after an overnight fast. All subjects had been weight stable (<2kg body weight change) during at least 6 months prior to investigation according to self-report Anthropometric measurements were performed followed by venous blood sampling. Plasma and serum were used for analysis of NEFA and other clinical chemistry variables as described. An abdominal subcutaneous WAT biopsy was obtained by fine needle aspiration as described.
The adipose tissue was brought to the laboratory, rinsed repeatedly in saline and visual blood vessels and cell debris were removed. Adipose tissue specimen (about two grams) were divided into portions, one of which was subjected to collagenase treatment to obtain isolated adipocytes as previously reported. The mean weight and volume of these cells were determined as previously described. 200µl of packed isolated adipocytes and 300mg unfractionated WAT pieces were frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at 70°C for subsequent DNA (cells) or RNA (tissue) preparation, whereas remaining tissue was used immediately for cell culture experiments.
Basal lipolytic activity was determined in adipose tissue explants as described. In brief, pieces of adipose tissue (200 or 300mg) were incubated for 2h (100mg/ml) at 37°C with air as the gas phase in KrebsRinger phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) supplemented with glucose (8.6mmol/l), ascorbic acid (0.1mg/ml) and bovine serum albumin (20mg/ml). Glycerol release into the medium was measured using a sensitive bioluminescence method and expressed as amount of glycerol release per 2h and 107 adipocytes. Adipocytes are the only adipose source of glycerol, which is an end product of lipolysis and only metabolized by adipose tissue to a minimal extent. Methodological experiment revealed that glycerol release in these type of experiments is linear with incubation time for at least 4h. Cross-sectional and longitudinal studies have demonstrated that basal lipolytic activity is strongly and negatively related to in vivo insulin sensitivity.
Basal lipolysis in isolated adipocytes was investigated using the same protocol as described above in diluted adipocyte suspensions (2% v/v).
 PLIN1 CpG methylation in the explorative cohort was analyzed in DNA extracted from adipocytes in a previously reported dataset applying the Infinium Human Methylation 450 BeadChip assay (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). The beta value (), which represents the ratio of intensities between methylated and unmethylated alleles, was used to quantify methylation at specific CpG loci. The -values vary from 0 (no methylation) to 1 (100% methylation). Of 11 probes mapping to the PLIN1 gene, we excluded two containing SNPs with MAF >10% within the probes according to Illumina annotation.
CpG-methylation in adipocytes from the validation cohort was analyzed by EPIC arrays. Briefly, 500 ng of genomic DNA was bisulfate converted with EZ-96 DNA Methylation kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA) and genome wide DNA methylation analysis was performed using the Infinium Human Methylation EPIC BeadChip (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). The laboratory procedures were performed according to the manufacturers protocol. For analysis, visualization and extraction of methylation data, the GenomeStudio software version 2011.1 (Illumina Inc.) was used. The analysis reported here was limited to CpG-sites in the PLIN1 gene region that should be confirmed from the explorative cohort. A comprehensive analysis of the full EPIC data is ongoing.
Five of the obese and nine of the never-obese women were used for validation of DMS by pyrosequencing; from remaining women we did not have any cells left. Genomic DNA was prepared from adipocytes using the QiAamp DNA Mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The DNA purity and quality was confirmed by A260/280 ratio >1.8 on a Nanodrop ND-1000 Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, US). The DNA concentration was measured by Qubit (Life technologies, Stockholm, Sweden).
Adipocyte genomic DNA (200 ng) was bisulfite converted according to the manufacturers instructions using the EZ DNA Methylation-Gold„¢ Kit (Zymo Research, Orange, CA, USA). Primers for PCR amplification and sequencing were designed using the PyroMark Assay Design 2.0 (Qiagen,). The following primers were used; for cg01035422 forward: TGTAAGGTAGGTGTTTTAGGATTTTAATA; biotinylated reverse: TAACCCTATTATCTCTCCCTCTCT and sequencing: GGTGTTTTAGGATTTTAATATTTAT. The nucleotide dispensing order was: TTYGGTTGAT CGTTATTTTA GTTTTATA; for cg04998447 forward: TTTGGGGAGTTGAGGGTT; biotinylated reverse: CCCCAACCTATATCCTCCT and sequencing: AGTTTTGGTTTGGTTTT. The nucleotide dispensing order was: GGGTTTTGYG TTTTTGATTT AT. Finally for cg08749443 biotinylated forward: TTTAGGAGAGTTTAGAGGGAAGATAGAAGT; reverse: AACCTAAATCCCTACTCTCACTTAATAA and sequencing: AAAAATAAAAAAAACAAATAAATAC. The dispensing order was: RAAAAAAAAA AAAAAATAAA ACTCTA. One µl bisulfite converted DNA was amplified using the PyroMark PCR kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturers instructions applying annealing temperature of 58°C. The entire PCR product was mixed with 4µM sequencing primer and sepharose beads (GE Healthcare, Danderyd, Sweden) and bisulfite pyrosequenced using the PSQ 96 ID system (Qiagen) with PyroMark Gold Q96 reagents (Qiagen).
 PLIN1 mRNA in the clinical samples was quantified by microarray using Gene 1.1 ST arrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, US) in 20 of the individuals in the explorative cohort, and by Gene 1.0 or 1.1 ST arrays in 57 of the women in the validation cohort; both groups formed parts of larger studies as described. For remaining subjects we did not have sufficient amount of WAT for transcriptome analysis.
Total RNA and DNA was extracted from cell culture samples using the AllPrep DNA/RNA Kit (Qiagen). Concentration and purity of nucleic acids was measured using a Nanodrop ND-1000 Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Lafayette, CO). cDNA synthesis was performed using iScript cDNA Synthesis kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) together with random hexamer primers (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Assessment of PLIN1 mRNA levels was performed using SYBR Green Mix (Bio-Rad Laboratories) and primers: PLIN1 forward 5-TGGAAACTGAGGAGAACAAG-3 and reverse 5-ATGTCACAGCCGAGATGG-3. Expression was normalized to the internal reference gene 18S forward 5-TGACTCAACACGGGAAACC-3 and reverse 5-TCGCTCCACCAACTAAGAAC-3 using the Ct method.
 PLIN1 promoter was PCR amplified using KAPA HotStart ReadyMix (Kapa Biosystems, Wilmington, MA) from human genomic DNA (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) using primers, forward 5-TATTGGATCCGTACAGCCCAGCACATTCACAACT-3 and reverse 5-TATTAAGCTTGCCCCAGGACCCCAACAC-3 (Sigma Aldrich, Dorset, UK) and cloned into the pCpGL-basic vector (kindly provided by prof. M. Rehli, Regensburg, Germany) via BamHI and HindIII (Thermo Scientific) sites, which yielded the pCpGL-PLIN vector. The correct insertion of a construct was controlled by sequencing. The cloned genomic sequence covered 1,731 base pairs upstream of the PLIN1 transcription start site, and included all CpG-sites in the promoter region of PLIN1 whose methylation status was assayed by microarray.
Both plasmids, pCpGL-PLIN and pCpGL-basic (no insert), were methylated using SssI methyltransferase (New England Biolabs, Hitchin, UK) according to the manufacturers recommendation. In brief, 1015µg of plasmid DNA was incubated with or without SssI methyltransferase (20U/µl; 2U/µg DNA) in the presence of 640µM S-Adenosylmethionine (SAM) (New England Biolabs) for four hours at 37°C, with another 640µM SAM being added after the first two hours of incubation. Plasmid DNA was purified using QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen). Methylation of plasmid DNA was controlled by digestion using methylation sensitive restriction enzyme HpaII (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for four hours at 37°C.
Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) isolated from adipose tissue and differentiated in vitro to adipocytes were used for the transfection with plasmids. Day 9 of differentiated cells were transfected using Neon electroporator (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturers protocol. The cell amount per 10µl electroporation tip was 100.000 together with 500ng of methylated or unmethylated pCpGL-basic or pCpGL-PLIN plasmids and 10ng of a plasmid containing Renilla luciferase gene (Promega, Madison, WI). Electroporation conditions were 1400Volts, 20ms width, and 2 pulses. Following electroporation the cells were cultured in 48-well plates for 24hours there after luciferase activities were measured in cell lysates using Dual Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega) according manufacturers instructions. Each sample was prepared in quadruplicates and the experiment was repeated three times.
hMSCs differentiated in vitro to adipocytes were treated with 50µM or 200µM of DNA methyltransferase inhibitor RG108 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) at differentiation day 1112 for 24h. Medium was collected and the cells were used to isolate RNA/DNA (AllPrep DNA/RNA Kit, Qiagen) and proteins. Isolated DNA was used for measuring global shifts in DNA methylation (Imprint Methylated DNA Quantification Kit, Sigma Aldrich,) according to the manufacturers instructions. Briefly, 60ng of DNA was diluted in DNA Binding Solution and incubated at 37°C for 60mins. After washing, Capture Antibody at dilution 1:1000 was added and incubated at RT for 60mins. After washing, Detection Antibody was added to each well at dilution 1:1000 and incubated at RT for 30mins. Thereafter Developing Solution was added and incubated at RT for 110mins. The reaction was stopped by adding Stop Solution and the absorbance was measured at 450nm (NanoQuant spectrophotometer, Tecan, Mnnedorf, Switzerland). Cytotoxicity of RG108 was determined in cell culture medium using Cytotoxicity determination kit (Roche Applied Science, Mannheim, Germany) according to the instruction of the manufacturer.
Approximately 250,000hMSCs were lysed in 140l RIPA buffer (150mM sodium chloride, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 50mM Tris, pH 8.0). 1520µg of total protein was separated by SDS-PAGE and Western blot was performed according to standard procedures. The membranes were blocked in 3% ECL Advance„¢ Blocking Agent (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK). Primary antibodies against Perilipin (GP29, Progen, Heidelberg, Germany) and -actin (Sigma Aldrich) were used. Secondary guinea-pig/rabbit-IgG antibodies were conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (Sigma-Aldrich). Protein bands were detected by chemiluminescence using ECL„¢ Select Western Blotting Detection Kit (GE Healthcare) in Chemidoc XRS system (Bio-Rad Larobarotries) and quantified by Quantity One software (Bio-Rad Laboratories).
Statistical analyses were performed in JMP v. 12. Shapiro-Wilks test was used to test whether the distribution of analyzed quantitative variables deviated from normality. Two-group comparisons of normally distributed variables were performed by two-sided Students t-test (age, diastolic blood pressure, cholesterol, NEFA, lipolysis measures, adipocyte volume, and PLIN1 mRNA and protein) and otherwise by Kruskal-Wallis test. Five of nine analyzed CpG-sites were not normally distributed; for simplicity all DNA methylation results were analyzed by Kruskal-Wallis test. Pyrosequencing results were due to small sample size analyzed by non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test. Relationship between degree of CpG-methylation and quantitative phenotypes was assessed by simple regression. Relationship between PLIN1 mRNA and quantitative phenotypes was assessed by multiple regression adjusting for batch. Lipolysis values were log10-transformed before analysis to become normally distributed. Values are mean+SD.
The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.