We studied 15 patients (12 female, three male) with osteoporosis of the low back (group 1; n =2) of the low back and hip (group 2; n =4), and both osteoporosis and osteoarthritis of the hip (group 3; n =9). All diagnoses were confirmed by iDXA and X-ray. Mean age of the patients was 69 years (range: 57 to 83 years). All patients were informed about the OSC treatment and gave written informed consent to the participation in this open-label study. A precondition for participating in the study was that, prior to the OSC-treatment, the patients had not taken medications which could have a significant influence on the course of the study. In addition the patients had to have pain and discomfort in the diseased areas at rest and during physical activity. Overweight patients (weighing more than 100 kg) were excluded from the study. The patients received three times daily 0.6 g OSC orally in vegetarian capsules, over a period of 20 days. The dosage was based on in vitro to in vivo extrapolation of the amount of OSC used in our cell mineralization experiments. Pain level was assessed by a 010 Numeric Pain Rating Scale (NPRS) where patients rated their pain on a score where 0=no pain; 5=moderate pain; 10=worst possible pain. Pain intensity was evaluated 5, 10, and 20 days after starting the OSC-treatment.
Eight primary human osteoblast cultures were established from trabecular bone tissue from osteoporotic patients (aged between 62 and 93 years). Six cultures were established from the femoral head, and two from the tibia. The bone specimens were briefly rinsed in PBS, cut into small pieces (12 mm in diameter), and then thoroughly rinsed in PBS. The small bone fragments were gently shaken with 2 mL crude collagenase (Biochrom, Berlin, Germany) at 37 °C for 2 h and then rinsed in PBS. The isolated cells were incubated in minimum essential medium (MEM) with 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum, 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin (Biochrom) at 37 °C in 5% CO2 humidified atmosphere and were left for 4 days before the first medium change. When primary cultures were confluent cells were detached with trypsin/EDTA (Biochrom) and pelleted. The cells were reconstituted in MEM and counted in a hemocytometer to ensure that an equal number of cells were seeded in the various experimental cultures. Dermal fibroblasts grown in MEM under identical conditions served as control cells.
Osteoblasts were cultured on small glass discs and at required time-points fixed in 1.5% glutaraldehyde for 30 min at 4 °C, post-fixed in 1% osmium tetroxide for 1 h at 4 °C, and dehydrated through a series of increasing concentrations of ethanol and dried using hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS). Samples were sputter coated with gold using an ion coater (Balzers Union) and analyzed using a scanning electron microscope (Philips, Holland) at 10 kV.
Activity of alkaline phosphatase in osteoblasts was detected as previously described using 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-phosphate/nitro blue tetrazolium (BCIP/NBT) (0.35 mM BCIP, 0.37 mM NBT, 5 mM MgCl2, 100 mM Tris buffer, pH 9.5, 45 min) as a precipitating substrate according to the manufacturers protocol (Sigma-Aldrich). In brief, prefixed cells were rinsed with 0.1 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.6) and incubated with substrate to obtain optimal staining intensity. After washing with Tris-HCl buffer, coverslips were embedded in antifading solution (glycerol gelatin; Sigma-Aldrich).
After washing the cells with PBS they were fixed in alcohol and incubated each with primary mouse monoclonal anti-human collagen type-1 and osteocalcin antibody (Thermo-Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany) for 30 min at room temperature. Then they were incubated with biotinylated secondary goat anti-mouse antibody (Dako, Hamburg) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark and subsequently treated with avidin-biotin complex (Biozol, Eching, Germany) for 30 min. Negative controls were obtained by omission of the primary antibody. Cells were counterstained with hemalaun and immunocytochemical staining was assessed using a Zeiss microscopy (Axioplan, Jena, Germany).
Total RNA of normal and test cells was extracted using the RNeasy Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and cDNA synthesis was performed using MMLV reverse transcriptase following the manufacturers instruction (Life Technologies, Inc.). For RT-PCR analysis, the cDNA was amplified for 30 cycles using the sense 5-CCAGCCGAGCCACATCGC-3 and anti-sense 5-ATGAGCCCCAGCCTTCTCCAT-3 oligonucleotides specific for the GAPDH gene (annealing temperature 55 °C), the sense 5-GATGACGATGAAGATGACAG-3 and anti-sense 5-CTCTTCACTCTCACTCTCTTG-3 specific for the DMP1 gene (annealing temperature 58 °C), the sense 5-GCAGCGAGGTAGTGAAGAG-3 and anti-sense 5-CGATGTGGTCAGCCAACTC-3 specific for the BGLAP gene (annealing temperature 60 °C), the sense 5-GCCATGACCACATGGATGAT-3 and anti-sense 5-GTCTACTGTGGGGACAACTG-3 specific for the SPP1 gene (annealing temperature 63 °C), and the sense 5-GAGATGACAGTTCAGAAGAG-3and anti-sense 5-TCATCCACTTCTGCTTCGC-3 specific for the IBSP gene (annealing temperature 57 °C). The reverse transcription PCR products were analyzed by 1.2% agarose gel electrophoresis. Alpha Imager Gel Doc gel documentation software (Biozym, Germany) was used for quantitation of mRNA expression normalized by GAPDH mRNA expression.
The test cells were cultivated under the same temperature and CO2 conditions as the control cells but the minimum essential medium (MEM) was supplemented with OSC (20 g/ml), consisting of mineral components similar to those of the bone (8 g/ml=0.2 mM calcium, 0.016 g/ml=0.5 M phosphorus, 0.08 g/ml=3 M magnesium, 3 ng/ml=30 nM strontium, 0.2 ng/ml=3 nM iron, 0.1 ng/ml=1 nM copper, and 0.2 pg/ml=0.002 nM selenium, as well as 0.6 ng/ml=0.02 IU Vitamin D and 2 g/ml eggshell membrane hydrolysate containing glycosaminoglycans such as chondroitin, glucosamine, and sulfated glycoproteins. The in vitro mineralization experiments were monitored over a period of 5, 10, 15, and 20 days respectively. The OSC doses and incubation times were determined in preliminary experiments (unpublished). Culture medium of both the test and the control cells supplemented with and without OSC was changed every second day. Calcium deposits in mineralized cultures were detected by staining with 10% Alizarin Red solution (Sigma-Aldrich) as described elsewhere . 
Control and test cells (2106 each) were grown over a period of 5, 10, 15, and 20 days in dish culture, rinsed twice with PBS and scraped off from the dishes using a cell scraper (Sarstedt, Nmbrecht, Germany). After centrifugation the cells were re-suspended and dissolved in 1 N HCl. Calcium content was measured using the Abcam Calcium Detection Assay Kit ab102505 (Abcam, Berlin). This colorimetric endpoint assay measures the amount of calciumcresolphthalein complexone formed when cresolphthalein complexone binds to free calcium in alkaline solution within the physiological range of 0.1 mM3.0 mM. Absorbance was measured at a wavelength of 575 nm with background subtraction of 490 nm using a microplate reader (Dynatech MR5000, Denkendorf, Germany).
Cell viability was measured using the non-radioactive LDH Detection Kit (Roche Diagnostics, Germany). Cells (2106 each) grown to monolayers were incubated for 15 days in MEM supplemented with OSC (for more information see induction of mineralization in Material Methods section). After centrifugation at 250 g for 10 min. The cell-free culture supernatants were collected and incubated according to the manufacturers instruction. To calculate cell viability day 15 control cells (2106) growing in MEM in absence of OSC were treated with Triton-100 (1% v/v) for one hour and served as second control. Absorbance was measured at 492 and 620 nm using a 96-well plate ELISA reader (Dynatech MR5000, Denkendorf, Germany).
Primary osteoblasts (2106 each) growing in MEM were either treated with 100 ng/ml IGF-1 (Life Technology, Darmstadt Germany) for 1 h, or cultivated in MEM supplemented with OSC (20 g/ml) over a period of 1, 5, 10, and 15 days. The cells were harvested by centrifugation (800 g for 5 min) washed with PBS, and lysed in a solution containing 20 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Igepal 0,5% SDS, 1 mM PMSF, 5% 2-mercaptoethanol, 10% glycerol in presence of protease inhibitor (Roche Diagnistics, Mannheim, Germany). Total protein extracts (10 g) were analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and Western blot. The primary mouse monoclonal antibodies against AKTPSer473 and ERK1/2PTyr204 were purchased from Life Technology (Darmstadt, Germany) and the horse radish peroxidase-conjugated second antibody from Dako (Hamburg, Germany). Immune complexes were detected utilizing the Amersham ECL Chemi-Lumi detection system and Amersham Hyperfilm MP (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK). The Alpha Imager Gel Doc gel documentation software (Biozym, Germany) was used for quantitation of protein expression.
Data concerning the pain score evaluation were analyzed by means of repeat measure One-Way ANOVA, followed by Bonferroni post-testing (SPSS vs 20). Data were considered statistically significant if p <0.05. All data are presented as mean values  standard deviation (SD). All in vitro experiments were carried out in triplicate and analysis of variance was performed by means of One-Way ANOVA, followed by Bonferroni post-testing (SPSS vs 20).