Eligible patients were adults (¥18 and <60 years) with relapsed/refractory non-M3 AML with adequate organ function and ECOG performance status 2. Patients with previous exposure to high-dose cytarabine were eligible. Patients with previous history of neurological toxicity with cytarabine or vorinostat were ineligible (See Appendix 1 for full Eligibility Criteria). Informed written consent approved by The Ohio State University Humans Studies Committee was obtained on all patients prior to enrollment, in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
The regimen consisted of epigenetic priming with decitabine followed by vorinostat, then high dose cytarabine (which was dose-escalated). The dosing regimen was based on pre-clinical data showing the myeloid apoptotic threshold decreased most significantly compared to other therapeutic sequences. Decitabine was given intravenously over 1 hour at a dose of 20mg/m2/day on Days 110. Vorinostat was given orally at a dose of 400mg/day on Days 510. Cytarabine was administered intravenously over 2 hours every 12 hours on Days 12, 14, and 16 for 6 doses total. Cytarabine was dose escalated as follows: dose level 1, 1.5g/m2/q12hr; dose level 2, 2g/m2/q12hr; dose level 3, 2.5g/m2/q12hr; and dose level 4, 3g/m2/q12hr (Table 1). The study was designed in classic 3+3 phase I design schema to determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and define dose limiting toxicity (DLT). Adverse events were graded according to National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria for Adverse Events, version 4.0. Responses were defined according to International Working Group (IWG) Criteria for AML, including complete remission (CR) and CR with incomplete count recovery (CRi), partial remission (PR), and treatment failure. Next generation sequencing using MiSeq platform assessed over 80 AML-associated gene mutations as previously described. KMT2A PTD and FLT3-ITD mutations were performed by PCR testing.
Grade 4 non-hematological toxicity attributable to any of the therapeutic agents, with exception of line-associated venous thrombosis, infection, fatigue, or nausea and vomiting controllable with anti-emetic therapy were defined as DLT. Hematologic toxicity was initially defined as failure to recover peripheral blood counts by Day 42 in patients with <5% blasts in the bone marrow, absence of myelodysplastic changes, and/or absence of disease by flow cytometry in the bone marrow. However, 2 patients at dose level 1 experienced delayed count recovery (beyond day 42) meeting the hematological DLT definition but both patients achieved CR with no long-term sequelae. It was felt disadvantageous to reduce chemotherapy doses due to high risk nature of the disease, and the protocol was modified to extend duration of hematologic DLT to Day 56 with G-CSF permitted to hasten neutrophil recovery in patients with hypoplastic bone marrow after treatment.
A standard method 3 + 3 phase I design of dose escalation using 3 patients per dose level cohort and a minimum of 6 patients at the MTD was performed. As an exploratory, phase I study, no inferential statistical tests of hypotheses were planned. Data collected are descriptive and provide limited estimates of variability given the small patient sample size at each dose level.