This study included patients with prostate carcinoma from twelve cohorts, including the cancer genome atlas project (TCGA), GSE54460, GSE21032, CPC-GENE, Cambridge, six retrieved from the Decipher GRID„¢ prostate cancer database (NCT02609269), and one from Belfast. A summary of the cohorts and procedures for pre-processing of transcriptomic data are provided in Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Methods. Patient cohort characteristics are summarised in Supplementary Table 2. The TCGA cohort was used as the training cohort. In addition, bladder cancer patients enrolled in a randomized trial of hypoxia-modifying therapy were available in the BCON cohort. Informed consent protocols were approved by local Institutional Review Boards.
Biochemical recurrence (BCR) free survival was the clinical endpoint of this study in all but one cohort. Distant metastasis (DMET) free survival was the clinical endpoint of the other cohort. Patient follow up data were censored at 5-year. The signature derived from this work assigned one hypoxia signature score for each individual tumour and in each cohort patients were stratified into high vs. low hypoxia based on the median cohort signature score. Survival estimates were performed using the Kaplan-Meier method. The Log-rank test was used to test the null hypothesis of equality of survival distributions. Hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were obtained using the Cox proportional hazard model. In case-cohort studies (originally designed to sample the adverse pathology population to estimate risk of metastasis after radical prostatectomy), randomly sampled sub-cohorts were used in order to reduce over-estimation of events in evaluation of the BCR endpoint. Odds ratios (OR) were obtained using logistic regression models. Association between hypoxia signature score and Gleason group, tumour stage was estimated using simple linear regression. All P-values were two sided and statistical significance was set as 0.05.
A network-based methodology was applied for generation of a prostate cancer-specific hypoxia signature, hypothesising that in vitro hypoxia regulated genes co-expressing with each other in vivo collectively indicate tumour hypoxia. Briefly, genes up- and down-regulated by hypoxia (1% O2, 24¯h) were identified with RNA sequencing in four PCa cell lines (PNT2-C2, LNCaP, DU-145, and PC-3). The four cell lines were chosen as they were derived from human tissues and are widely used as in vitro PCa models. A gene co-expression network was constructed in a TCGA training cohort and a putative gene module enriched with in vitro hypoxia genes was identified. Genes within the putative module were ranked by their connectivity and added iteratively into the signature. The final signature was selected based on prognostic significance. The signature scores are a continuous variable, which were then binarised into high and low categories using the median value for each cohort. The hypoxia signature derived here was then independently validated in the other eleven PCa cohorts. In multivariable analysis, the hypoxia gene signature was adjusted for standard clinic-pathological factors and a genomic classifier Decipher. More details were given in Supplementary Methods.
Seven hypoxia and eleven prostate cancer transcriptomic signatures were curated from the literature and their prognostic significances were evaluated for comparison (Supplementary methods). Furthermore, the potential benefit of combining the de novo hypoxia signature with a prognostic 31-loci DNA classifier was also investigated by entering both into a Cox model.