The clinical study was approved by the Oxfordshire Regional Ethics Committee and all methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations, with registrations: prospectively with EudraCT 2005-000834-34 and retrospectively with ISRCTN18146225 (date of assignment 12.10.2017). All participants had World Health Organisation (WHO) performance status 02 and provided written informed consent. Recruitment occurred between May 2006 and February 2010. Individuals over the age of 18 with histologically proven invasive cancer of the esophagus or esophagogastric junction (EGJ), as per Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) definition of esophageal cancer (6th edition), but excluding Siewert type III EGJ tumors, were eligible for inclusion. Exclusion criteria included: stage I (T1 N0) disease or any evidence of metastatic disease. See Supplementary Information.
A matched cohort of 54 EAC patients treated with surgery alone between 1997 and 2004 was used to study if either biomarker identified in the study was prognostic in the absence of peri-operative chemotherapy. Patients were frequency matched for age, sex and stage, as shown in Table 1.
Patients had clinical examination, full blood count and measurement of serum biochemistry at baseline and before each cycle of chemotherapy. Pre-treatment staging was performed by contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT), 18fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG-) positron emission tomography (PET)-CT, and endoscopic ultrasound. Staging laparoscopy was performed for all patients with tumors involving the esophago-gastric junction, and distal esophageal tumors extending below the diaphragm. Pre-treatment tumor and normal tissue samples (from macroscopically normal squamous epithelium 510cm proximal to the upper limit of visible tumor) were biopsied endoscopically, and samples obtained from surgery in those proceeding to surgical resection. Samples were placed immediately into RNAlater solution, for later RNA extraction, or formalin, for subsequent processing into paraffin blocks, or flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. A strict sampling handling protocol was mandatory, with uniform fixation times, tissue processing and storage conditions for all samples in the study.
Patients received two cycles of oxaliplatin-fluorouracil chemotherapy. A cycle of treatment lasted 21 days and consisted of oxaliplatin (130mg/m2 IV) on day 1, followed by fluorouracil (1000mg/m2/day IV) on days 14. Restaging was performed by 15F-FDG PET-CT. Patients who did not progress to become inoperable were operated on 46 weeks after completion of chemotherapy. Pathological response was determined using the histological grading of tumor regression described by Mandard. All slides were independently reviewed by two specialist gastrointestinal pathologists, with 96% concordance.
Gene expression was measured in the tumor biopsies and post-surgical resection samples. RNA was extracted using the Qiagen AllPrep DNA/RNA Micro Kit (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA) following the manufacturers instructions. RNA purity was verified via NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Extracted mRNA samples were hybridised to Illumina HumanHT-12-v3 Expression BeadChips (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Raw gene expression data was processed using Illumina GenomeStudio software (v1.6) to generate expression intensities which were considered in a logged base 2 scale. Data were then analysed using R statistical software (v2.15) (http://www.Rproject.org) (R development Core Team, 2012) with BioConductor packages (Gentleman et al., 2004), limma (v3.12.3)(Smyth, 2005), vsn (v3.24) and survival (v2.36.13), for microarray analyses and SPSS software version 19.0 (IBM Inc., Armonk, NY, USA) for all other analyses. A P-value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant. Differential expression between the experimental groups was assessed by generating relevant contrasts corresponding to the two-group comparison. Hazard ratios for OS and DFS according to gene expression level were calculated using Cox regression (see Statistical methods section below). For functional pathway analysis, the Gene Set Analysis (GSA) R package was used to determine the significance of pre-defined sets of genes (the biocarta gene sets) with respect to outcome variables. Finally, a hypothesis-driven approach was undertaken and validation focused on the differentially expressed genes amongst 280 genes belonging to DNA damage repair pathways expected to be relevant for the treatment response (Supplementary Table S1).
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was carried out using the Leica Bond-Max automated immunostainer (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany), using the manufacturers protocol. IHC was conducted on 5 m sections cut from paraffin-embedded biopsies, stained with mouse anti-XPF (clone SPM228) at 1:200 dilution or mouse anti-MUS81 (clone MTA30 2G10/3) at 1:1000 dilution, both from Abcam, Cambridge, MA). Antibodies to XPF, MUS81 and ERCC1 (Santa Cruz sc-17809) were tested for specificity using cell pellets depleted for XPF or MUS81 protein by siRNA interference (Supplementary Figures S1 and S2). For XPF measurement, two independent assessors scored staining semi-quantitatively via a score relating nuclear staining intensity and the percentage of stained nuclei. For MUS81, high expression was defined by a median cutoff, greater than 10% of nuclei staining with high intensity. Further details available in Supplementary Information.
Thirty EAC patients were prioritized for whole exome sequencing (WES) on the basis of pathological response, disease free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) at 2 years, performed as previously described.
Colorectal cancer cell line HCT116 and isogenic variants (MUS81 null and EME1 haplo-insufficient) were provided by Prof. Kiyoshi Miyagawa (University of Tokyo, Japan). Esophageal cell lines OE33 and Flo1 were obtained from ECACC. For siRNA depletion, cells were treated 96 and 48hours prior to plating using ON-TARGETplus siRNA (GE Lifesciences, Dharmacon, USA) to MUS81 and XPF, and Lipofectamine RNAiMAX transfection reagent (Thermofisher), following manufacturers instructions (full details in Supplementary Information).
For definitions of disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS), see Supplementary Information. Individuals were censored at the last date they were known to be alive and disease-free (DFS), or alive (OS). Kaplan-Meier curves were calculated for DFS and OS. Due to the relatively small number of individuals in the study and in order not to exclude potentially useful candidate genes, analyses of the relationship between pre-treatment gene expression levels and clinical outcomes were not corrected for multiple testing. Individual gene expression was tested for association with pathological response, one year DFS and OS, and a P-value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant. For comparison of pre- and post- treatment gene expression, P-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) procedure.
We performed a translational clinical trial to discover biomarkers for esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) patients who are likely to benefit from oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy. Through mRNA expression profiling, we identified DNA repair genes associated with clinical outcomes. Two novel biomarkers were identified and studied by immunohistochemistry of clinical samples and mechanistic studies in cancer cell lines. These biomarkers merit further validation in prospective clinical trials in patients with EAC.