CLR457 was synthesized in the Global Discovery Chemistry group (Novartis). In vitro PI3K and protein kinase biochemical assays were performed as described previously to determine isoform-specific potency. To evaluate antitumor activity in vivo, three xenograft models were utilized: Rat1-myr-p110, Rat1-myr-p110´, and HBRX2524. For Rat1-myr-p110 and Rat1-myr-p110´, Rat1 fibroblasts were transfected with an N-terminal myristoylated form of PI3K or PI3K´ isoform, which led to constitutive activation of the PI3K pathway. Tumor xenografts were then grown subcutaneously in nude mice or nude rats by injection of 2 to 3106 cells into the right flank (for Rat1-myr-p110 and Rat1-myr-p110´). For HBRX2524, a patient-derived breast cancer tumor bearing the H1047R PIK3CA activating mutation was established by subcutaneously implanting resected patient tumor samples in nude mice without any in vitro manipulations. CLR457 antitumor activity was then evaluated as described previously. Systemic exposure and bioavailability of CLR457 and effects on glucose homeostasis were assessed after single and repeat dosing in mice and rats. Plasma insulin levels were assessed with a commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit (Mercodia). Blood glucose levels were determined using a Glucometer (One Touch Ultra, LifeScan). (Supplemental Methods).
This was a first-in-human multicenter, open-label, phase I study investigating CLR457 in adult patients with PI3K-activated advanced solid tumors (NCT02189174). The primary objective was to define the maximum tolerated dose (MTD). Secondary objectives included assessments for safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetic (PK) profile, and preliminary antitumor activity. All procedures performed involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.
Patients had histologically documented locally advanced or metastatic solid tumors harboring an activating PIK3CA mutation or amplification, PTEN loss of function, c-MET activation, EGFR activation,17 and/or HER2 overexpression,17 or endometrial cancer that had progressed or failed standard therapy. Other key inclusion criteria included age¥18 years, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (ECOG-PS) 2, adequate organ function, measurable or non-measurable disease as determined by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) version 1.1. Key exclusion criteria included type 1 or 2 diabetes mellitus requiring insulin treatment, fasting plasma glucose ¥140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L), prior pancreatitis, pneumonitis, active small or large intestinal inflammation, central nervous system (CNS) metastasis, prior treatment with AKT, mTOR, and PI3K inhibitors, or inadequate cardiac, renal, lung or liver organ function.
CLR457 was administered orally once daily (QD) on a continuous schedule until patients experienced unacceptable toxicity, had progressive disease, and/or treatment was discontinued at the discretion of the investigator or withdrawal of consent. The starting dose for CLR457 was 5 mg QD, based on preclinical toxicology studies in accordance with ICH guidelines, and was administered at the same time each day 2 h in a fasted state. Various doses were planned up to 300 mg QD until MTD determination.
Safety was evaluated by incidence, nature, severity, and relatedness of adverse events (AEs), and graded according to National Cancer Institute - Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI CTCAE) v4.0.3. DLTs were defined as any hematologic or non-hematologic ¥ Grade 3 AE assessed as possibly related to CLR457 that occurred within the first cycle (28 days) of treatment. In addition, uncontrolled (> 14 days) Grade 2 rash or hyperglycemia were also considered DLTs. All AEs regardless of attribution were collected until 30 days following the last administration of treatment or study discontinuation/termination.
Pretreatment tumoral mutational analysis was performed at the treating institutions and reviewed by the Investigator. CLR457 PK was evaluated using plasma samples collected during Cycle 1 - Day 1 (C1D1) and Cycle 1 - Day 15 (C1D15) at pre-dose, and 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, and 24 h post-dose by liquid chromatographymass spectrometry (LC-MS). PK parameters including area under the curve (AUC), maximum serum concentration (Cmax), and time taken to reach Cmax (Tmax) were calculated using non-compartmental methods in Phoenix WinNonlin. 
Efficacy assessments including overall response rate (ORR) and disease control rate (DCR) were analyzed as per RECIST v1.1 by local investigator interpretation based on interval imaging every 2 cycles. 
For the preclinical studies, absolute values for primary tumor growth and body weight were used to make the statistical comparisons between groups (one way analysis of variance [ANOVA] test followed by Dunnetts test for normally distributed data; ANOVA on ranks for not normally distributed data followed by Dunnetts test for equal group size or Dunns for unequal group size). The significant level was set at p<0.05.
Descriptive methods were used to tabulate toxicity and response endpoints in the clinical trial. All patients treated with CLR457 were included for safety. The MTD was defined as the highest dose of CLR457 not causing a DLT in >33% of patients during the first treatment cycle. Dose escalation was guided by an adaptive Bayesian logistic regression model (BLRM) incorporating the escalation with overdose control (EWOC) principle. Under EWOC, the dose selected as the MTD must have a<25% chance that the true DLT rate exceeds 33%, given the available DLT information. The study data (including DLTs during cycle 1 and other safety and PK data) were reviewed by the sponsor and trial investigators at each dose level. Patients had to complete a minimum of one cycle of treatment with the minimum safety evaluation and drug exposure or to have had a DLT within the first cycle of treatment to be considered evaluable for dose escalation decisions. The Full Analysis Set (FAS) included all patients who received at least one dose of CLR457. Safety set included all patients who received at least one dose of CLR457 and had at least one valid post-baseline assessment. The Dose-determining set (DDS) included all patients from the safety set who either met the following minimum exposure criterion and had sufficient safety evaluations, or experienced a DLT during Cycle 1 (the first 28 days of dosing). The Pharmacokinetic analysis set included all patients who had at least one blood sample providing evaluable PK data.
The ORR was defined as the proportion of patients at each post-baseline scan who exhibited a complete response (CR) or partial response (PR) according to RECIST 1.1. The DCR was defined as the proportion of patients at each post-baseline scan who exhibited a CR, PR or stable disease (SD).