This study was a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial conducted on 40 infertile women, aged 18 to 40 years old, with PCOS, diagnosed using Rotterdam criteria, who were candidate for IVF. The study was registered in the Iranian website for clinical trials registration (http://www.irct.ir: IRCT20170513033941N27). Recruited participants were referred patients at Research and Clinical Center for Infertility and Naghavi Clinic, Kashan, Iran, from December 2017 through March 2018. Any case of metabolic disorders, including thyroid disorder, diabetes or impaired glucose tolerance was excluded at screening phase. This study was performed following Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the research ethics committee of Kashan University of Medical Sciences (KAUMS). Written informed consent was signed by all subjects prior to the intervention.
Participants were randomly assigned into two intervention groups to receive either 50,000 IU vitamin D (n=20) or placebo (n=20) every other week for 8 weeks. Vitamin D and placebo (paraffin) capsules were similarly matched in color, shape, size and packaging, and were manufactured by Zahravi (Tabriz, Iran) and Barij Essence (Kashan, Iran), respectively. Random number table was used for randomization by one of the researchers not involved in other processes of trial. Randomization and allocation were concealed from the investigators and study participants until the completion of analyses. Compliance rate was assessed through measuring serum 25(OH)D levels and asking patients to return back the medication containers. To increase the compliance, all subjects were received a short message on their cell phones every day, throughout the trial, to take the supplements.
Insulin metabolism was considered as the primary outcome. Lipid profiles and gene expression of insulin and lipid metabolism were defined as the secondary outcomes. Fifteen milliliter fasting blood was collected at the beginning and end of the trial at Naghavi Clinic laboratory, Kashan, Iran. Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) concentrations were measured on the day of blood collection, using enzymatic kits with the coefficient variances (CVs) of less than 5%. Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25 (OH) D) concentrations were determined by an ELISA kit (IDS, Boldon, UK) with inter- and intra-assay CVs of lower than 7%. Serum AMH levels were measured using an ELISA kit (Bioactiva, Homburg, Germany) with CVs of lower than 6%. Serum insulin concentrations were measured by an ELISA kit (DiaMetra, Milano, Italy) with inter- and intra-assay CVs of 3.5 and 5.0%, respectively. The homeostasis model of assessment-insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) and the quantitative insulin sensitivity check index (QUICKI) were determined according to the published formula. Enzymatic kits (Pars Azmun, Tehran, Iran) were applied to measure serum lipid profiles with inter- and intra-assay of less than 5%.
Blood samples were used to extract lymphocyte cells, using 50% percoll (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK). Cell count and viability test were performed using trypan blue, RNA and DNA extraction.
RNA was extracted from blood samples using RNX-plus kit (Cinnacolon, Tehran, Iran). RNA suspension was frozen at 20 °C until cDNA was derived. RNA quantification was conducted using UV spectrophotometer and total RNAs were extracted from each sample. Each sample OD 260/280 ratio was considered to range from 1.7 to 2.1, representing no contamination with either protein or DNA.
The isolated RNA was reverse transcribed to cDNA library, using moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (RT). Gene expressions of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-), glucose transporter 1 (GLUT-1) and low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) were done using peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) via SYBR green detection and Amplicon Kit, applying quantitative RT-PCR and Light Cycler technology (Roche Diagnostics, Rotkreuz, Switzerland) (Table 1). Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) primers were used as a housekeeping gene. Primers were designed using Primer Express Software (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, USA) and Beacon designer software (Takaposizt, Tehran, Iran). Relative transcription levels were calculated using Pffafi or 2-††CT methods.
Clinical trial sample size formula was used to calculate sample size considering a type one error () of 0.05 and type two error () of 0.20 with the power of 80%. Mean difference (d) of HOMA-IR equal to 0.8 and SD of 0.8 were used for the calculation. Sample size was defined as 16 participants in each group. Considering 4 probable dropouts in each group, the final sample size was determined to be 20 participants in each group.
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was used to assess the normal distribution of variables. Analyses were replicated using intention-to-treat (ITT) approach. To determine the differences in anthropometric measures and gene expression of insulin and lipid metabolism between the intervention groups, we used independent samples t-test. The effects of vitamin D supplementation on glycemic control and markers of cardiometabolic risk were assessed using repeated measures ANOVA test. The P-values of <0.05 were considered statistically significant. Statistical analyses were conducted using the Statistical Package for Social Science version 18 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois, USA).