The GPR44/DP2 antagonist, AZD1981, 4-(acetylamino)-3-[(4-chlorophenyl)thio]-2-methyl-1H-indole-1-acetic acid, previously a clinical candidate for treatment of asthma was investigated for treatment of T2DM. The biochemical and pharmacological properties of AZD1981 was recently described. Here, the in vitro pharmacological properties of AZD1981 was further investigated in the human beta-cell line EndoC-betaH1, which has high expression of GPR44/DP2 (confirmed by qPCR, Fig Ba in S1 File). Briefly, EndoC-betaH1 cells were plated in fibronectin- and extracellular matrix-coated 96-well plates for the in vitro pharmacology analyses and functional assays. Experimental details of the methods are described in the supporting information S1 File.
The EC50 for PGD2 inhibition of glucose stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) was determined using EndoC-betaH1 cells. The cells were incubated with varying concentrations of the stable PGD2 analogue 15(R)-15-methyl PGD2 (Cayman Chemical, USA) at 11.1 mM glucose and insulin secretion was determined. The EC50 value for PGD2 was calculated from the dose response curve. Since EndoC-betaH1 cells has no expression of L-PGDS (confirmed by qPCR, data not shown) and thus cannot produce PGD2, the stable PGD2 analogue was added at EC80 concentration and the effect of the specific GPR44/DP2 antagonist AZD1981 was determined at 11.1 mM glucose or in the presence of a GLP-1 receptor agonist (100 nM exendin-4; Bachem AG, Switzerland).
Human islets (Prodo Laboratories Inc. USA) were used to study PGD2 secretion, GSIS and for qPCR analysis of the gene expression of enzymes in the PGD2 synthesis pathway. The acute effect of PGD2 on GSIS was measured by incubating human islets for 1h in low (2.8mM) or high (11.1mM) glucose, with or without addition of 1 nM 15(R)-15-methyl PGD2. In other experiments, islets were incubated in high glucose (22.2 mM) with and without addition of 20 ng/ml interleukin 1-beta (IL-1beta) and PGD2 secretion into the culture media was determined after 24 h (PGD2 EIA, Cayman Chemical). The expression of genes in the PGD2 synthesis pathway and GPR44/DP2 were further studied by reanalyzing published human islet single cell sequencing data (MTAB-5061, EBI accession number). Experimental details are available in the supporting information S1 File.
This study (http://clinicaltrials.gov NCT02367066) was a phase 1, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multiple-dose, cross-over study conducted at a single centre. The aim was to explore the acute effects of GPR44/DP2 antagonism on both glucose and incretin dependent insulin secretion in T2DM. Hence a cross-over design was chosen with three-day treatment periods upon which steady state of the oral GPR44/DP2 antagonist AZD1981 was to be reached. The study consisted of a run-in, two three-day treatment periods separated by a wash-out period, and follow-up. During each treatment period, the pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) effects of AZD1981 or placebo were characterized in a mixed meal tolerance test (MMTT) or by a graded glucose infusion (GGI), respectively. A paracetamol test was conducted simultaneously with the MMTT to determine the effects of AZD1981 on gastric emptying.
The primary objectives were defined as change from baseline (day -1 to day 3) for endpoints; a) mixed meal tolerance test (MMTT) area under curve (AUC) (0-4h) for plasma glucose, b) MMTT Cmax and c) graded glucose infusion AUC (1-2h) for plasma C-peptide. The study was powered to detect therapeutically relevant changes for these primary variables. A number of secondary and exploratory variables all linked to insulin secretion or PK/PD were also assessed.
The study was conducted at ProSciento Inc in Chula Vista, CA, USA and the study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board Schulman IRB in Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. All subjects gave their written voluntary informed consent before participation. Patients were enrolled between March 2015 and April 2015. See Fig 1 for study flow chart. More study details are available in the supporting information S1 File.
The enrolled patients were diagnosed with T2DM and had inadequate glycaemic control on a metformin regimen. Patients were adult males or females, had glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c) levels between ¥58.5mmol/mol (7.5%) and 97 mmol/mol (11%) at enrolment, were treated with metformin alone for at least the last three months, and had a fasting glucose level from 314 mmol/l (54252 mg/dl). See Table 1 for subject demographics at screening.
Patients were fasting overnight and all oral medications including metformin were dispensed 75 min prior to the first PD assessment (MMTT). During the MMTT (Ensure Plus drink, 473 ml, 100g carbohydrates), blood sampling was conducted at baseline, 15, 30, 60, 90 and 120 min post the mixed meal intake. During the GGI, by 20% glucose intravenous infusion over 2h with a constant rate GLP-1 infusion the last hour, blood sampling was conducted at 10 min intervals. Blood samples were obtained for assessments of AZD1981 PK on days 2, 3, 8, and 9 concurrent with the MMTT and GGI, and for paracetamol PK on days 3 and 9 during the MMTT. More details are available in the supporting information S1 File.
Bedside plasma glucose during GGI was measured by an YSI-2300 analyzer (YSI Life Science, USA). For MMTT & GGI plasma insulin, C-peptide, glucagon and total GLP-1 were analyzed by the respective ELISA (Mercodia AB, Sweden) and glucose by a colorimetric method. Plasma paracetamol and AZD1981 concentrations were measured by LC-MS (Covance Bioanalytical services, IN, USA). EDTA plasma and urine was collected on day -1, 3, 6 and 9 for analysis of exploratory PGD2 biomarkers performed at AstraZeneca. More details are available in the supporting information S1 File.
The clinical study was powered to detect therapeutically relevant changes for the primary variables. The sample size for the MMTT was based on internal studies that estimated the intra-individual standard deviation (SD) for ln(MMTT AUCGlc 0-4h) to be 0.1. With this estimated SD and an alpha of 0.1, one-sided test and at least 8% difference versus control in MMTT AUCGlc 0-4h, a sample size of 20 evaluable patients was determined to provide at least 80% power. The 8% difference was chosen based on the rational that it is a clinically relevant magnitude as this is the effect observed by DPPIV inhibitors. Similarly, the planned sample size for the GGI was determined based on an estimated SD of ln(GGI AUCC-pep 1-2h) as 0.17. Based on similar power calculations, a sample size of 20 evaluable patients was determined to provide at least 80% power to detect at least a 20% difference versus control for GGI AUCC-pep 1-2h.
Summary statistics are provided for all of the PK and PD variables assessed. The PK evaluable population was used to assess the PK endpoints. PK parameters were derived using actual sampling times and standard non-compartmental methods, and summarized descriptively for both AZD1981 and paracetamol. The three primary PD variables were the MMTT AUCGlc 0-4h, MMTTGlc-Cmax, and the GGI AUCC-pep 1-2h (PD evaluable population). The difference in primary variables between AZD1981 and placebo were analyzed using a mixed-effects model that includes treatment (2 levels), treatment sequence (2 levels), and period (2 levels) as fixed effects, baseline values of the dependent variable as a covariate, and subject-within-sequence as a random effect, were used to analyze the difference in MMTT AUCGlc 0-4h, MMTTGlc-Cmax, and the GGI AUCC-pep 1-2h between AZD1981 and placebo. We assumed that there was no carryover effect in the crossover study as the 3 day wash-out period should have appropriately removed any impact from carryover between treatment periods. The primary variables were log-transformed prior to analysis and then transformed back to linear scale. Significance was established 1-sided at 10%. Treatment estimates were provided as estimated least square mean ratios with a 80% 2-sided CI. All secondary endpoints of the PD parameters and the pre-hepatic ISR (fasting -cell responsiveness) was analyzed similarly as those described for the primary PD endpoints. No tests for multiplicity testing were performed for the secondary endpoints. The SAS MIXED procedure was used for the statistical analysis.
Pre-hepatic insulin secretion rate (ISR) over time was calculated using deconvolution of peripheral C-peptide concentrations during MMTT using the method of Hovorka et al.