This trial using the acronym IRISS (Interventional Radiology, Immunology, Surgery Study) was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the local institutional review board of the University Hospital Tbingen (Reference No. 169/2005V and 638/2014BO2). All participants provided written informed consent before study inclusion.
Sixteen patients were recruited for this study. Patient characteristics are provided in Supplementary Table 1. The first group (Figure 1) included all consenting patients with metastases from CRC in different liver segments, scheduled for treatment with RFA and subsequent liver surgery at Tbingen University Hospital, recruited in the course of a 5-year period (n = 9). This RFA + surgery group [all men; mean age 64 years (range, 4579 years) at initial diagnosis] included six patients with sufficient sample materials for in-depth analyses (mCRC and non-malignant liver (NML) tissues, as well as PBMCs for immunological evaluation). Patients in this group were treated with one session of RFA for one of the tumor lesions, followed by subsequent surgical resection (on average 4 weeks after RFA; range 18 weeks) of the non-RFA-pretreated, distant liver metastases.
A corresponding control group included patients (n = 7) with liver metastases of mCRC scheduled for surgery only (five males; mean age 58 years (range, 4577 years) at initial diagnosis). Of note, no fresh frozen tumor/NML tissue or PBMCs was available for this group and only paraffin embedded tumor tissue was accessible for immunohistochemical evaluation.
All patients were treated with curative intent according to institutional standards and presented with a median number of two mCRC lesions (min.  max.: 17).
For patients included in the RFA + surgery group and evaluated in immunological experiments (n = 6), blood samples were collected before RFA treatment, at surgery (~1 month later), and at several follow-up visits thereafter, at intervals of 14 months (Figure 1). Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated by density gradient centrifugation and cryopreserved in freezing medium [fetal calf serum (FCS) with 10% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO)] until subsequent analysis.
Additionally, during elective liver surgery for mCRC, scheduled after RFA treatment, resected tissue was obtained from both mCRC as well as NML tissue. Tissue samples without diagnostic relevance were divided and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen or else stored in RNA later (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and kept at 80°C for long-term cryopreservation until analysis.
For all patients from both groups (n = 16), mCRC tissue samples were paraffin embedded, and diagnosis was confirmed by expert pathologist review. Paraffin embedded tissue was used for immunohistochemical evaluation.
For the patients included in the RFA + surgery group (n = 6), high-resolution HLA typing from peripheral blood (LUMINEX and sequence-based typing according to implemented validated institutional clinical routines) was performed for HLA-A and HLA-B (Table 1).
Immunoaffinity purification was used for parallel isolation of HLA class I and II molecules from tissue lysates, employing the pan HLA class I monoclonal antibody W6/32 as well as the HLA-DR monoclonal antibody L243 together with the pan HLA class II monoclonal antibody T39 (all produced in-house at the Department of Immunology, University of Tbingen, Germany) as previously described. HLA class I and II-bound peptides were separately eluted using 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid.
Purified HLA-bound peptides from HLA class I and II immunoprecipitates were analyzed in up to six technical replicates of each sample, as previously described. Briefly, purified peptides were separated by nanoflow ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (uHPLC; UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System, ThermoFisher) using a 50 m 25 cm column (PepMap RSLC, ThermoFisher) and an acetonitrile gradient ranging from 2.4 to 32.0% over the course of 90 min. uHPLC eluting peptides were analyzed in an online coupled linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher), equipped with a nanoelectron spray ion source employing a top 5 collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation method.
The Mascot search engine (Mascot 2.2.04, Matrix Science, Boston, MA) was used to search the human proteome contained in the Swiss-Prot database (20,279 reviewed protein sequences, as of September 2013) without any enzymatic restriction (required Mascot ion score ¥20; search engine rank: 1). As a dynamic modification oxidized methionine was allowed. The false discovery rate was estimated with the Percolator algorithm and set to 5%. Peptide lengths for HLA class I-eluted peptides were limited from 8 to 12 amino acids (required charge state: 23) and for HLA class II-eluted peptides from 9 to 25 amino acids (required charge state: 25). Protein inference was disabled, allowing for multiple protein annotations of peptides. HLA class I annotation was performed using SYFPEITHI, and NetMHC (vers. 3.4).
Whole transcriptome sequencing (WTS) was performed after isolation of mRNA from the patient's tissue samples (mCRC vs. NML) using 100 ng of total RNA and the TruSeq Stranded mRNA Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA) with 14 cycles of PCR. Tissue sample from patient IRISS06 were processed using 40 ng of total RNA and the TruSeq RNA Access Kit (Illumina) with 15 cycles of amplification. All samples were sequenced on a HiSeq 2500 device (Illumina) as paired-end sequencing. Sequencing depth was 2040 million cluster/ sample with 68 cycles per read.
Adapters were trimmed using SeqPurge [v. 0.1, https://github.com/marc-sturm/ngs-bits]. Trimmed reads were mapped to hg19 using STAR (v. 2.4.2a). Duplicates were removed by picard tools (MarkDuplicates v. 1.85, http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/).
Expression Analysis: Read counts were calculated using the HTSeq count based method implemented in STAR and Ensembl gene annotations (GRCh37 v. 75). Read counts were normalized using CPM (counts per million mapped reads) and log2 fold-changes (FC) were calculated to filter genes with high expression differences.
Variant Calling: Strelka (v. 1.0.11; in matched tumor/normal mode) was used for variant calling and called variants were annotated based on several different databases including among others dbSNP, ExAC, COSMIC, ClinVar and HGMD. SNPeff, Sift, MetaLR, and Polyphen were used to predict effects on gene function. For detection of gene fusions deFuse (v. 0.6.1) was used.
For the six patients of the RFA + surgery group, the multi-step selection approach used included the reassessment of MS/MS detected HLA class I-eluted peptides (a representative example for this approach is provided in Figure 2 for patient IRISS12) regarding their HLA binding affinity by dedicated software [SYFPEITHI >50% max. score and NetMHC v. 3.4 (IC50 <500 nM) ]step 1 (see binders in Table 1 and counts in Supplementary Table 3), subtraction of HLA ligands eluted from non-malignant liver tissue (NML) from those of corresponding mCRC tissuestep 2, as well as the subtraction of all HLA ligands identified on all available non-malignant colon tissue (NMT) samples from the mCRC cohort step 3. Since the target pool remained extensive at this stage, the strategy was extended to filter out HLA-eluted peptides from non-malignant colon samples available from previous studiesstep 4, and subsequently expanded to all HLA class I ligands included in an in-house database comprising 132 non-malignant human tissues from different organs, as already used previously in CRC step 5. To avoid the selection of peptides presented on HLA class II, any HLA class I-eluted peptides presumably representing shorter length variants of longer HLA class II ligands were discardedstep 6. Finally, to enhance the stringency of selection, HLA class I-eluted peptides were only retained when surpassing a relative SYFPEITHI score of >60% of the maximal allelic scorestep 7. For patient IRISS06, step 2 was omitted, because autologous NML tissue was not available. In addition, for patient IRISS09, the HLA-peptide elution resulted unsuccessful for tumor tissue.
For HLA class II (Figure 3, Supplementary Table 4), peptides eluted from mCRC were initially compared to the peptides characterized by MS/MS on corresponding NML, discarding the overlapstep 1. Subsequently, all HLA class II-eluted peptides of NMT of the entire mCRC cohort were deductedstep 2, as well as all HLA class II-eluted peptides detected in non-malignant colon tissue from previous studiesstep 3, then all HLA class II ligands included in an in-house HLA class II peptide database comprising 82 non-malignant human tissues from different organs were eliminatedstep 4. Finally, for stringency, all HLA class I peptides comprised in a comprehensive database of benign tissues (n = 132) and in the NML tissue from the mCRC cohort were subtractedstep 5. A representative HLA class II selection approach (for patient IRISS12) is provided in Figure 3. For patient IRISS06, step 1 was omitted because autologous NML tissue was not available. Again, for patient IRISS09, the HLA-peptide elution remained unsuccessful for mCRC.
For prediction of mutation-derived HLA ligands, only non-synonymous somatic variants [single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and Insertion/Deletions (InDels)] were selected, when being sequenced with >25 reads in mCRC and simultaneously remaining undetectable in corresponding NML. Additionally, all ambiguous gene transcripts mapping to more than one genetic locus were discarded. Gene fusions were chosen in case >10 split-reads were detectable in mCRC with a probability value >0.8%. Only known driver mutations and variants affecting genes with established relevance for malignant development were selected. For gene fusions the latter was required for at least one of the involved genes.
Non-synonymous somatic variants and gene fusions were translated into the corresponding protein containing the amino acid altered by mutation. The protein sequence flanking the altered amino acid sequence was then disaggregated and screened for HLA class I peptide sequences with a SYFPEITHI score >60% of the maximal allelic score. Mutation containing peptides predicted to bind to the respective patient's HLA class I alleles were extended at the N- and C-terminus to produce a 15 mer peptide, covering both the predicted binding HLA class I peptide sequence as well as peptide sequences showing HLA class II binding properties. Finally, two predicted potential mutated neoantigens were selected, a mutated sequence in the ERRB3 protein for IRISS06 (mERBB3) and a fusion-derived peptide between the two proteins Malic enzyme 2 and SMAD family member 4 (MAOM-SMADA4) for patient IRISS12.
None of the predicted mutation-derived HLA ligands could be confirmed in MS/MS data of HLA ligands eluted from respective mCRC tissue.
Candidate tumor antigen-derived peptides were collated and manually curated for each patient, selecting a manageable set of short and/or long peptides for immunological testing. Criteria for non-mutated peptide selection included increased expression of the source antigen in the tumor as compared to autologous normal tissue [fold change (log2); FC], frequency of identification among RFA and CRC cohorts (for HLA class II ligands, length variants were considered), tumor association (e.g., involvement of the source protein in cancerogenesis according to the literature, representation in tumor-associated pathways¦). Representation in cancer-associated pathways (Supplementary Table 2) was established by literature research (www.pubmed.gov), as well as through the human protein atlas (www.proteinatlas.org).
The two mentioned predicted mutated peptides were prioritized. Altogether, a ranking list of peptides to be tested was established for each individual patient, and the final number of peptides tested was adjusted to the numbers of available PBMCs (between 6 and 9 peptides/patient, Supplementary Table 2).
Peptides required for T cell stimulation assays (Supplementary Table 2) were synthesized in house (Department of Immunology, University of Tbingen, Germany) by solid-phase synthesis with the 9-fluorenylmethyl-oxycarbonyl/tert-butyl (Fmoc/tBu) strategy in an automated peptide synthesizer (EPS 221, Abimed; ABI 433A, Applied Biosystems). Lyophilized peptides were diluted at 1 mg/ml in distilled water with 10% DMSO and stored at 80°C.
PBMCs from six patients (RFA + surgery group) were thawed, washed and seeded at ~36  106 cells per well in a 48-well-plate in IMDM (Lonza, Verviers, Belgium) with 10% heat-inactivated human serum containing 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and 50 M -mercaptoethanol (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) (culture medium). After overnight resting, pooled synthetic peptides were added at 2.5 or 5 g/ml, for HLA class I and HLA class II peptide stimulations, respectively. Cell culture was performed for 12 days and medium supplemented with recombinant IL-2 (2 ng/ml, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) on days 3, 5, 7, and 9.
Peptide-specific T cells were quantified by intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) for both CD8+ and CD4+ cells. Directly after 12-day pre-sensitization, cultivated cells were washed and stimulated with the relevant individual peptides (10 g/ml; in pools or individually) and pre-incubated for 1 h (37°C; 7.5% CO2) in the presence of the monoclonal antibody (mAb) CD107a-FITC (clone H4A3, BD Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany). Phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) (5 ng/ml) plus ionomycin (1 M) (both Sigma-Aldrich) served as positive control and 10% DMSO was used as negative control. Subsequently, secretion of intracellularly produced cytokines was prevented by adding GolgiSTOP (BD Biosciences) and Brefeldin A (10 g/ml, Sigma-Aldrich). After a 12 h stimulation period, cells were washed and stained as previously described with mAbs CD3-BV711 (clone OKT3, Biolegend, San Diego, CA), CD8-PE-Cy7 (clone SFCI21Thy2D3, Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA), CD4-APC-Cy7 (clone RPA-T4, BD Biosciences), anti-IFN-BV421 (clone 4S.B3, Biolegend), anti-TNF-BV605 (clone Mab11, Biolegend), anti-IL-2-PE and anti-CD154-APC (clone MQ1-17H12 and clone TRAP1, respectively, both BD Biosciences). LIVE/DEAD Fixable Aqua Dead Cell Stain Kit (ThermoFisher) was included in the stainings. Samples were acquired on a flow cytometer (LSR Fortessa, BD Biosciences) equipped with the DIVA software and analyzed with FlowJo software (TreeStar, Ashland, OR).
The following gating strategy was applied: time gate (histogram)/singlet cells (FSC-H/FSC-A), living cells (FSC-A/ Live/Dead Fixable Aqua), lymphocytes (FSC-A/SSC-A), CD3+ (FSC-A/CD3) CD4neg and CD8neg cells (CD4/CD8); T cell activation (cytokine production, CD107a and CD154 of CD8+/CD4+ subsets was assessed within the CD4neg and CD8neg lymphocytes, respectively). Results are expressed as % of marker-positive cells within CD4+ or CD8+ subsets.
Immune responses were considered positive if (I.) the percentage of cytokine producing cells within the sample was 2-fold above the percentage of cytokine producing cells within the corresponding negative control (10% DMSO; no stimulation, as described above), (II.) the number of cytokine producing cells within the sample was ¥20 cells after subtraction of the number of cytokine producing cells within the corresponding negative control (10% DMSO; no stimulation), and (III.) at least two of the five investigated parameters (IFN, TNF, IL-2 cytokine production or CD107a, CD154 upregulation) were positive according to the criteria under (I.) and (II.). All dot-plots were audited.
Formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue from all 16 patients of both groups was cut in 35 m-thick sections and stained with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Immunohistochemistry was performed by an automated immunostainer (Roche Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, AZ) according to the manufacturer's instructions for open procedures with slight modifications. Samples were stained with antibodies against CD4 (clone SP35, Zytomed Systems, Berlin, Germany), CD8 (clone C8/144B, DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark), CD14 (clone EPR3653, MEDAC Diagnostika, Wedel, Germany), CD19 (clone LE-CD19, Zytomed), CD45RO (clone UCH-L1, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), CD68 (clone KP1, DAKO), Granzyme B (clone 11F1, Novocastra, Wetzlar, Germany), HLA class I (polyclonal, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX), HLA-DR, -DP, and DQ (clone CR3-43, DAKO), HSP70 (clone W27, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), IL-10 (polyclonal, Abcam), and LAMP3 (polyclonal, Sigma-Aldrich). Appropriate positive and negative controls were employed to confirm the adequacy of the staining.
Stained slides were digitalized using a Hamamatsu NanoZoomer (C9600-12) using NDP.scan (v. 2.5.88) and NPD.view (v. 2.6.13) software (all from Hamamatsu Photonics, Hamamatsu City, Japan).
Slides were first counted using automated digital slide analysis. For each marker, five representative high-power fields (HPF) were captured using a 200-fold magnification. The number of positive cells was enumerated and the mean for every case was calculated. CD4, CD8, CD19, and CD68 stainings were evaluated using the CD4Quantifier software, which is part of the CognitionMaster Professional Suite (VMscope GmbH, Germany). CD14, CD45RO, HLA-DR, HSP70, IL-10, HLA class I and LAMP3 were evaluated manually. For CD14 and CD45RO, the mean number of positive cells per five HPF was assessed by manual counting. Concerning HLA-DR, we calculated the percentage of positive tumor cells. For HSP70, IL-10, and MHC I, we used the immunoreactive score (IRS). In brief, the IRS is calculated by multiplying the number of positive cells (0 = 0%, 1 = 110%, 2 = 1150%, 3 = 5180%, 4 = >80%) with the staining intensity (0 = no staining, 1 = weak staining, 2 = moderate staining, 3 = strong staining), resulting in a score ranging from 0 to 12.
Slides were also counted manually using the count tool of Adobe Photoshop (v. CC 2018, Adobe Systems, San Jos©, CA). Areas for manual counting were defined as follows: invasive margins were defined as 500 m in both directions of the tumor border (inwards/outwards). Counting areas were selected using the hot-spot method (good pathological practice) and were defined as areas with subjective/visually most positive stained cells [3  0.2 mm2 (radius: 252 m) for each area].
Both automated and manual counting was performed in a blinded fashion by expert pathologists and group assignment was only unblinded to the evaluating pathologists after completion of statistical evaluation.
Genomic DNA was extracted from macrodissected paraffin sections using the Maxwell RSC FFPE Plus DNA Purification Kit and the Maxwell 16 Instrument (Promega, Madison, WI), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Microsatellite PCR in duplicates was performed using genomic DNA and AmpliTaq Gold DNA Polymerase (ThermoFisher) as well-fluorescent labeled primers (Sigma-Aldrich). For GeneScan analysis PCR products were mixed with sample loading solution (Beckman Coulter). The products were separated by capillary electrophoresis on the GenomeLab GeXP Genetic Analysis System and analyzed by the GenomeLab GeXP software 10.2 (Beckman Coulter).
Mann Whitney U-Tests were performed using GraphPad Prism Version 6.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). Kaplan Meyer, COX regression and log rank analyses were performed using SPSS Version 24 (IBM, Armonk, NY). Significance levels were set to p < 0.05 and respective values considered as statistically significant.