Patients with a new diagnosis of primary breast cancer were recruited in three UK centres. The study was prospectively approved by the NHS Oxfordshire Research Ethics Committee A and registered with the ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01266486. Metformin was given in the Glucophage XR„¢ formulation in an escalating dose once daily for a minimum of 13 days and a maximum of 21 days (500mg for days 13, 1000mg for days 46 and 1500mg thereafter). The day prior to commencing metformin a core biopsy was taken under ultrasound guidance from the periphery of the primary tumour and a second biopsy using the same approach after 1321 days of metformin treatment as above. Within 1min of this procedure the biopsy material was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to storage at 80°C. Please see Fig. S1A and Lord et al., Cell Metabolism for further details.
Next-generation sequencing of ˜Poly (A) targeted mRNA was carried out for the clinical biopsy samples taken pre and post-metformin. The fold change of normalised expression level, FPKM (Fragments Per Kilobase of transcript per Million mapped reads), for each gene was then estimated from those aligned reads using Cuffdiff 2.2.1. Non-parametric rank product (R project v3.3.1) was used to prioritise the genes with statistically significant change in abundance (FDR<0.05) between pre- and post-metformin treatment.
Statistical analysis and graphs for in vitro and in vivo models were carried out using GraphPad Prism v6.0 (GraphPad). Methods used to estimate significance included one-way ANOVA and unpaired Students t-test. The latter was used unless otherwise described in the text. Standard error of the mean (SEM) was used to report variability unless otherwise indicated in the text. Based on our and others previous analyses of gene expression data, we estimated that a minimum of 20 cases with paired measurements at two time points were sufficient to observe expression changes of at least 1.7-fold in genes showing a coefficient of variation at each time point up to 50% with a significance level after multiple test correction of p=0.05 (taking into account filtering of not expressed transcripts) and an 80% power. However, this estimate assumes uniformity of drug response and so double the number was desirable for higher significance and considering correlation with other markers.
All cell lines were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection within the past 2 years (LGC standards, UK). LGC standards routinely authenticate cell lines using short tandem repeat profiling. All cell lines were passaged for only a maximum of 3 months after resuscitation. All cell lines were tested for mycoplasma contamination prior to use. None of the cell lines used are listed in the database of commonly misidentified cell lines identified by the ICLAC. Human breast carcinoma cell lines MCF7, T47D, BT474, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-157 cells were all cultured in Dulbeccos Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum (FBS) and 100U/ml penicillin, and 100g /ml streptomycin and cultured at 37°C and in 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator. Metformin was purchased from Calbiochem, and etomoxir, AICAR and rotenone from SigmaAldrich.
FA methyl esters (FAMEs) of adipocyte TGs were prepared and analysed by GC as described previously. FA concentrations were calculated relative to an internal standard (C15:0 TG), and the results expressed either as micrograms of FA per 4106 cells or as percentage of total TG. For DG:TG calculations, lipids were extracted as described except that the fractions were separated using thin layer chromatography rather than solid phase extraction columns and using a C15:0 DG internal standard.
Fifty micromolar [U-13C]palmitate (CK Gas, Ibstock, UK) was added to MCF7 and MDA-MB-468 cells for 48h. After harvesting cells, FAMEs were prepared. TGFAs were quantitated using GC and the isotopic enrichment of TG measured using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GCMS) as previously described. Isotopically labelled DNL substrates were added to metformin-treated MCF7 cells to determine the effects of metformin on substrate contribution towards lipid synthesis. Twenty-five millimolar D-[U-13C]glucose, 4mM [U-13C]glutamine and 5mM [U-13C]lactate were used. FAMEs were prepared from harvested cells after 48h of the indicated treatment and TGFAs were measured for amount of FA and isotopic enrichment of FA using GC and GCMS, respectively. The contribution of each substrate towards DNL was calculated using quantitative mass spectral analysis as previously described. Briefly, we calculated the fraction of all 13C carbon atoms in the product (e.g. palmitic acid). As the substrates [U-13C]glucose, [U-13C]glutamine and [U-13C]lactate were uniformly labelled, this represented the fraction of the product formed from the substrate being studied.
As previously described 2H2O was added to media to a concentration of 5%. Cells were then harvested after 48h of the indicated treatment and TG and PL FAMEs prepared prior to GC and GCMS analysis. Molar enrichment of each TGFA was measured and percentage synthesis calculated based on observed/theoretical molar enrichment. The amount of DNL-derived FA was then calculated from the total TGFA measured using GC analysis and expressed as µg FA/4106 cells or as percentage of total TGFA. PL analysis was carried out as per TGFA analysis except only measuring enrichment of palmitate due to the very low enrichment of other FAs in the PL fraction (likely due to lower levels of modification of PL DNL-derived palmitate).
Cells were treated for 48h with either 0, 1 or 2mM metformin, with or without 100µM etomoxir. FAO was then measured as previously described using 0.5mM oleate and 0.5µCi [14C]oleate (Perkin Elmer, UK) solution bound to bovine serum albumin in low (5mM) glucose DMEM. Rate of oxidation was calculated as pmol CO2/h/4106 cells.
All protocols were carried out under Home Office regulations and were approved by the University of Oxford Medical Sciences Division AWERB Committee. Six to eight-week-old female Balb-C nu/nu mice (Harlan) were injected into the mammary fat pad with 25l Matrigel (BD Bioscience) and 2.5106 MDA-MB-468 cells suspended in 25l serum free medium. Once greater than 50% of xenografts had reached a size greater than 150mm3 half the mice were treated with metformin in the drinking water (750mg/kg/day). Tumour volume was calculated from the formula V=LWHÏ/6 (L=length, W=width, and H=height). Animals were not randomised but allocated to the metformin or no treatment arms with equal weighting for tumour size at baseline. The investigator was not blinded to the group allocation during the experiment. Once tumours reached 1.44cm3 mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation. Tumours were then snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and frozen sections cut and stained with LD540 and DAPI (Vectashield mounting medium with DAPI). A Zeiss Axio Observer Z1 inverted epifluorescence microscope was used to capture images of the (less necrotic) periphery of the tumour. The area staining for lipid with LD540 was then defined as a percentage of the area staining for DAPI using image analysis software (ImageJ).
MCF7 cells were seeded on sterile coverslips in 6-well plates overnight prior to treatment for 48h with 0, 2 or 10mM metformin treatment prior to removal and staining with LD540 and DAPI (Vectashield mounting medium with DAPI). Z-stack images were then created with laser scanning confocal microscopy (Zeiss LSM510 Meta). Control samples had oleic acid to a concentration of 250M added for 24h prior to microscopy.
For BODIPY uptake measurements, cells were treated with the fluorescent palmitate analogue, 4,4-difluoro-5,7-dimethyl-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene-3-hexadecanoic acid (BODIPY FL C16, Invitrogen) for 15min and then washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS). After harvesting with trypsinisation the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde prior to re-suspension in PBS and then analysed using a FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) and Cellquest software (BD Biosciences).
100,000 cells were plated on a 6-well dish and the following day the media replaced with DMEM media supplemented with metformin at a concentration of 0 (control) or 2mM and/or 100M etomoxir. The media was supplemented with or without 25mM glucose, with or without 20mM galactose and with 1mM pyruvate and 4mM glutamine. For the fatty acid supplementation experiment the media was supplemented with and without a mixture of fatty acid at a concentration of 0.2, 0.5 and 1mM (oleate, palmitate and linoleate in a ratio of 45%, 30% and 25%, respectively). Cell number was counted at 96h using an automated cell counter (Nexcelom). To maintain more consistent nutrient concentrations the media was replaced on a 24-hourly basis.