Complement gene expression in GC by RNA sequencing were retrieved from the UCSC Cancer Genomics Browser, which were collected from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data portal. 384 GC tissues and 37 tumor-adjacent normal tissues were harvested from the TCGA cohort. Additional 12 samples with paired tissues were extracted from the Oncomine database to assess gene and protein expression of the complement system for GC.
From August to December 2013, adult patients with confirmed diagnosis of GC were prospectively enrolled. Consecutive participants referred or admitted to our center for surgical treatment were screened for eligibility. All included patients were managed and followed up as our published procedures. Inclusion criteria were: (1) A primary GC tumor should be resectable on the basis of preoperative evaluation, with no suspicion of distant metastasis; (2) adult age between 18 and 75years, with no limitation of gender; (3) A radical gastrectomy with adequate lymphadenectomy was suggested after a multidisciplinary team meeting, with adjuvant chemotherapy scheduled or not.
Exclusion criteria included: (1) another synchronized malignancy, severe concomitant basic disease (cardiopulmonary dysfunction, tuberculosis, Crohns disease or psychosis) and uncontrolled infection except for Hp infection; (2) requirement of emergency surgery due to tumor progression, history of major abdominal surgery within the last six months; (3) long-term use of corticosteroids, insulin, oral antidiabetic drugs, or other agents for obesity; (4) history of blood transfusion or purification therapy within the last three months.
This study was carried out in accordance with the recommendations of NCCN guidelines for gastric cancer, with written informed consent from all subjects. All subjects gave written informed consent in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University and registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02425930). The last follow-up date was 7th July 2018.
Fresh-paired samples, including tumor and adjacent normal tissues, were collected from specimens isolated in the theatre. Those samples were immediately frozen with liquid nitrogen and stored at 80°C for future tests. Peripheral blood samples were routinely collected at baseline, one day before and three days after gastrectomy, respectively. Plasma was obtained by centrifugation (3000g, 20min, 4°C) and stored at 80°C until tested.
Human SGC-7901 and MGC-803 cells, normal gastric epithelial cells (GES-1) were purchased from the Cell Bank of Chinese Academy of Medical Science (Shanghai, China). All cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium supplied with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), penicillin (100U/mL), and streptomycin (100mg/mL) at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. Cells were routinely tested for mycoplasma contamination (MycoAlert„¢ PLUS Mycoplasma Detection Kit, Lonza). For cell culture, 5060% confluent cells were transiently incubated with specific agents for 48h until the extraction of RNA and protein lysates.
Purified recombinant human C3 protein (HuC3, 20ng/ml, MBS230377, MyBioSource, San Diego, CA) was added to or left out of the culturing medium. Exogenous C3 was depleted with cobra venom factor (CVF; Heng Fei biological technology, Shanghai, China), as previously described. Complement receptor 1 (CR1/CD35, MBS717740, MyBioSource) was used to block C3 activation as previously confirmed, with JAK2 blocker (AG490, 25M, InvivoGen, Hongkong) used to inhibit STAT3 signaling pathway.
Cell lysates were extracted from gastric tissues and cancer cell lines. The primary antibodies targeted C3, C3a, C5a, CD35, Factor B (fB), IL-6, JAK2, STAT3, pSTAT3 and GAPDH proteins (Abcam, USA). Total protein was obtained through a cell lysis buffer (KeyGene, Nanjing, China) and the protein concentration was quantified using the enhanced BCA protein assay kit (KeyGene, Nanjing, China). The PageRuler„¢ prestained protein ladder (#26616, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was used to estimate protein sizes. Proteins were separated by 810% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and electrotransferred to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (BioRad, Richmond, CA). After that, the membranes with deposited proteins were blocked for 1h in tris-buffered saline Tween (TBST; T8060, Solarbio) and probed with various primary antibodies, overnight at 4°C, followed by incubation with rabbit and mouse radish peroxidase-coupled secondary antibody (BA1055, 1:2500; Biosterbio, Wuhan, China) for 1h. Protein bands were visualized by using an enhanced ECL„¢ detection kit (KGP1121, KeyGene, Nanjing, China) and captured with a camera (Canon Inc., Japan).
qRT-PCR experiments were performed to detect mRNA expression of C3, C3a and C5, as previously reported. Briefly, total RNA was extracted from GC cell lines using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Aliquots of total RNA were reversely transcribed into single-strand-cDNA by incubation with virus reverse transcriptase (6110A; Takara Biochemicals, Kusatsu, Japan). After that, the specific primers for C3, C3a and C5 mRNAs (Additional file 1: Table S1) were used to guide the amplification of cDNA products with 40cycles at 95°C for 20s and 60°C for 1min. The abundance of each target mRNA was normalized to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) mRNA and presented as 2[(Ct/GAPDH - Ct/gene of interest)].
IHC method was employed to detect regional deposition of complement components, including C3 (ab200999, Abcam), C3a (neo-epitope, ab11873, Abcam), C5a (neo-epitope, ab11878, Abcam), fB (ab192577, Abcam), and CR1 (anti-CD35, ab25, Abcam). IHC results were analyzed by two experienced pathologists blinded to patients information, and were scored by a semi-quantitative method in which staining of more than 10% of tumor cells was considered positive. The staining intensity was scaled as 0 for negative, 1 for weak (10~40%), 2 for moderate (40~70%) and 3 for strong (>70%). The average score of staining intensity was calculated with five independent high-power fields using IMAGE PLUS software (Version 6.0, Media Cybernetics, USA). Low and high C3 deposition were defined as 1 and>1 point, respectively. Deparaffinized sections from harvested human tissues were pretreated with 10mM sodium citrate buffer (pH6.0, boiling temperature, 30min), blocked in normal serum (Vectastain ABC Kit; Vector Lab., Inc., CA, USA), incubated with primary antibodies (solution with saline, 1:100) at 4°C overnight, rinsed and incubated with secondary antibody (EliVision plus, DAB Kit, 9902).
Double-marker immunofluorescence staining on paraffin-embedded human tissues were performed as previously described. The primary and secondary antibodies included rabbit anti-human C3 (1:2000, ab20099, Abcam), rabbit anti-human C5a (1:2000, ab11876, Abcam), rabbit anti-phosphorylated (p)-STAT3 (1:2000, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) and goat anti-human IL-6 (1:800, R&D systems, Minneapolis, MN). Bound antibodies were revealed by fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies: Alexa Fluor 594 goat anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L; 1:300, ZF-0513) and Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L; 1:300, ZF-0512) both from Invitrogen Molecular Probes (Carlsbad, CA). All slides were counterstained with DAPI Nucleic Acid Stain (1:1000, Carlsbad, CA) for 60min. Finally, confocal analysis was performed with a Nikon C2 confocal system (Nikon, Melville, NY) to capture separated and merged images from all sections.
Plasma levels of C3a, C5a and fB in GC patients at perioperative period were monitored using specific ELISA Kits (Thermo Scientific, Frederick, USA). Briefly, 100l per well of plasma with standard solution were added to antibody-coated 96-well plates and incubated for 2h at room temperature, followed by incubation of polyclonal antibody for specific effector for 1h. Then the plate was washed and incubated with avidin conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (Lifespan BioScience, USA) for 1h, followed by optical density detection with an ELISA plate-reader at 450nm. Assays detected only cleaved C3a and C5a peptides in plasma.
A transwell assay system (Corning co. Ltd., USA) was employed to assess GC cell invasion, with a wound-healing assay used to assess tumor migration, as previously published.. Nearly 2.0104 cells in 100l of serum-free medium were added to each upper chamber for 24h, with 5 replicate wells set up for each condition. Medium containing 10% FBS applied to the lower chamber as chemo-attractant. After 24h of incubation, the cells that migrated and adhered to the surface of lower chamber were fixed with ethanol, stained with 0.5% crystal violet, photographed at 200x, and counted at 400x magnification (Olympus, Japan).
A wound-healing assay was performed to assess cancer cell migration. In brief, cells were plated (2105/well) in 6-well plates and grown to 90% confluency. Central bands were artificially scratched with a sterile pipette tip to make a 1cm wide ribbon. Afterward, the dislodged cells were removed by two PBS washes and serum-free culture medium was added for 48h. The wound width and cell density were observed at 12h, 24h and 48h, respectively.
Flow cytometric analysis detected the apoptosis rate and cell cycle of GC cells, as previously described. Cancer cells were harvested after 48h of culture via ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid-free trypsinization. Human purified C3 protein (20ng/ml) or CVF protein (40ng/ml) was selectively added into the culture medium, with PBS added as normal control (NC). Early apoptosis rate was detected using an annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate apoptosis detection kit (Oncogene Research, Boston, MA). The cell cycle was investigated via PI/RNase staining methods by using FACScan and CellQuest software (Becton Dickinson, CA).
The relationship between regional expression of C3 and clinical characteristics was analyzed with the chi-square test. Continuous variables were compared between both groups with the t test. Correlation between C3 deposition and other factors was revealed with a linear regression. Survival analyses were performed using the Kaplan-Meier estimate. The prognostic value of selective parameters was determined with the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis, with a value of area under the curve (AUC) approaching 1.0 showing predictive power. All data were analyzed with SPSS (Version 23.0). Statistical significance was set at 0.05.
The datasets used and analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
The study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University and registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02425930).
Not applicable.