Patients with relapsed/refractory and high-risk treatment-na¯ve CLL were enrolled on a phase II, single-center study using acalabrutinib. (www.clinicaltrials.gov; NCT02337829). Written informed consent was obtained in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, applicable federal regulations, and requirements from the local Institutional Review Board. Patients (n=48) were randomized to acalabrutinib 200mg every 24 hours (qd) (n=24) or 100mg every 12 hours (bid) (n=24). Characteristics of 45 patients included in these correlative studies are summarized in Table S1. After dosing for three consecutive days, drug was held for two days followed by continuous daily dosing until disease progression or intolerance. Peripheral blood samples were collected pre-treatment (Pre), at peak (4 hours post dose; day 3), at trough, (12 hours post dose for bid; 24 hours for qd; day 4), at trough+24 hours (36 and 48 hours, respectively, day 5) and at the end of cycle 1 (day 28). Mononuclear cells were isolated using lymphocyte separation medium (ICN Biomedicals, Irvine, CA) and viably frozen in 90% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 10% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in liquid nitrogen.
Tumor cells were purified using CD19+ selection (MACS Cell Separation Columns, Miltenyi Biotec, Cambridge, MA). Total RNA was extracted from CD19+ cell pellets using RNeasy (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA), and cDNA was prepared using the High Capacity cDNA RT Kit (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA). Expression of 11 previously validated BCR and NF-B target genes (Table S2) was quantified by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on TaqMan Custom Arrays (384-well plate) on an ABI PRISM 7900HT Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems) and pathway-specific signature scores were determined as previously described. Briefly, the difference in threshold cycle (Ct) for each gene of interest was calculated from the Ct of the housekeeping gene (VCP) minus the Ct of the gene of interest. The Ct for the pathway-specific genes were averaged into a signature score (five unique genes for BCR, five unique genes for NF-B, and one gene [CCL4] shared by both pathways).
The percentage of drug-bound BTK in human samples was measured using an ELISA-based method as previously described. OptiPlates (96-well; PerkinElmer) were coated overnight at 4C with anti-BTK antibody (BD Biosciences; Franklin Lakes, NJ) and blocked with BSA the following day for 2 to 3 hours at room temperature. Lysis buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) was used to lyse PBMC pellets. For each timepoint, the cell lysate was incubated for 1 hour in the presence or absence of acalabrutinib (1M). Incubation of the cell lysate with an excess of acalabrutinib was used to correct for background signal not related to free BTK. After exogenous treatment with or without acalabrutinib, the cell lysates were incubated with the BTK target occupancy probe ACP-4016 for 1 hour before being plated onto an anti-BTK antibody-coated plate. This probe binds covalently to Cys481 in the ATP pocket in BTK when the ATP pocket is not occupied by a covalent BTK inhibitor. Two-hour incubation was followed by a 1-hour incubation with streptavidin horseradish peroxidase (strep-HRP; ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) to allow binding between strep-HRP and the probe ACP-4016. Substrate that reacts with the bound strep-HRP was added to allow for measurement of luminescence. The percentage of BTK protein bound by acalabrutinib was calculated using the difference in the luminescence signal of the samples incubated with or without exogenous acalabrutinib (1M) and is expressed as a percentage of the luminescence signal in the pre-dose sample. The signal of the day 1 (pre-dose) sample without exogenous acalabrutinib represents 100% free BTK, while the signal of the day 1 (pre-dose) sample with 1M exogenous acalabrutinib represents 0% free BTK (or 100% occupied BTK).
Analysis of phosphoprotein expression was evaluated as previously described. Briefly, anti-CD19 APC was used to define the CLL population. Cells were then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Alfa Aesar, Haverhill, MA), permeabilized with 80% ethanol (Sigma) at 20C and stained with one of the following Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated antibodies (BD Biosciences): IgG1-isotype control, IgG2a-isotype control, pBTKY223, pBTKY551, pPLCg2Y759, pP38Y182, pERKT202/Y204 and pNF-B pP65S529. Gating strategy and representative histograms are shown in Supplementary Fig. S1. To concurrently analyze two samples in one flow tube, cells were barcoded with pacific blue (Invitrogen), as previously described. Cells were acquired on a BD FACSCanto II and analyzed using FlowJo software (TreeStar, Ashland, OR). MFI is measured after isotype subtraction. Cell surface activation markers were evaluated as previously described. Briefly, PBMCs were stained with: anti-CD19 APC, anti-CD3 FITC, anti-CD5 PE-Cy7 and one of the following PE-conjugated antibodies: IgG1-isotype control, CD69, or CD86 (Fig. S2.)
For direct activation of BCR signaling, PBMCs were stimulated with goat anti-human IgM F(ab)2 [10g/mL] + H2O2 [3.3 nM] for 10 minutes at 37°C, as described previously. Samples were fixed with 1.6% paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes at 37°C, and permeabilization with ice cold 90% methanol overnight at 80°C. Samples were washed and stained with rabbit anti-pBTKY223 antibody (Abcam; Cambridge, United Kingdom) plus fluorescently labeled mouse antibodies against human CD20 PerCP-Cy5.5, CD19 PE-Cy7, CD3 BV421, CD5 BV510, and cleaved PARP Alexa Fluor 700 (BD Biosciences). Samples were washed with PBS + 0.5% BSA and incubated with secondary goat anti-rabbit IgG Alexa Fluor 647 (ThermoFisher) for 30 minutes at 4°C. Cells were acquired on a BD FACSVerse flow cytometer and analyzed using FCS Express (De Novo Software, Glendale, CA). The pBTKY223 median fluorescence value (MFI) was collected from the CLL population, defined as cleaved PARP, CD19+, CD20+, CD5+, CD3 phenotype (Fig. S3.) To measure BCR-induced CD69 expression, PBMCs were stimulated with [10g/mL] goat anti-human IgM and incubated for 18 hours at 37°C, 5% CO2 in 96-well flat-bottom plates. Cells were stained with anti-CD69 FITC, anti-CD5 Alexa Fluor 700, anti-CD19 BV421, anti-CD3 BV510 antibodies (BD Biosciences) and acquired on FACSVerse, excluding dead cells with 7-AAD viability dye (ThermoFisher). The degree of inhibition was compared to positive controls where a saturating concentration of acalabrutinib (1M) is incubated with each pre-dose patient sample, prior to ex vivo stimulation (Fig. S4.)
NF-B activity was measured using the TransAM NF-B p50 transcription factor assay kit (Active Motif, Carlsbad, CA) as previously described. Nuclear lysates of purified CLL cells pretreatment, day 3 and 28 were applied to 96-well plates coated with oligonucleotides containing the NF-B consensus sequence (59-GGGACTTTCC-39). Concentration of p50 was determined by comparing samples with a standard curve of purified p50 protein (Active Motif).
NGS was performed on DNA from isolated B cells using an Illumina TruSeq Custom Amplicon panel of 10 genes associated with CLL on a MiSeq Sequencing instrument. Sequence alignment to hg19 and variant calling were performed using Illumina MiSeq Reporter Software. Average coverage of 500x (bi-directional) and a variant allele frequency >5% was required for reporting. Clinical relevance for each variant was determined according to 2015 ACMG guidelines. IGHV rearrangements were identified by NGS and aligned to reference sequences in the international ImMunoGeneTics (IMGT) database for percent homology (Aegis, Nashville, TN).
Serum was stored at 80°C until analysis. Concentrations of CCL4 were measured using the Bio-Plex Pro Human assay (BIO-RAID, Hercules, CA) with the Luminex 200 instrument (Austin, TX) according to the manufacturers instructions.
To compare measurements in individual patients across time, the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test was used. To compare results between the two dosing cohorts, the Wilcoxon rank-sum was used. Correlations were evaluated using the Pearson test. Data were computed using Prism 7 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA).