The subjects in this study were women of reproductive age. This is a prospective non-randomized cohort study. We prospectively collected biopsy samples from women with fibroids and performed retrospective analysis of biopsy samples derived from GnRHa-treated and -untreated women after surgery. Since this is an observational study to examine the effect of GnRHa on expression profiles of ER/PR/fibrosis, we believe that our samples can be considered representative of a larger population. From April 2014 to December 2016, biopsy specimens were collected from a total of 18 women with submucosal myoma (SMM), 16 women with intramural myoma (IMM) and 17 women with subserosal myoma (SSM) who underwent surgery during this period. The criteria for the classification of SMM, IMM and SSM were based on the classification of the European Society of Hysteroscopy. All these women were admitted to our hospital with the complaint of abnormal genital bleeding, hypermenorrhoea or anemia with or without associated complaint of dysmenorrhea or pelvic pain. All participants were prospectively recruited based on complains of patients. The uterine fibroids in all these women were diagnosed by ultrasonograghapy and magnetic resonance image before operation. The diagnosis of all fibroids was confirmed by surgery. Six women with SMM, 8 women with IMM and 6 women with SSM were treated with GnRH agonist (leuprolide acetate) for a variable period of 3-6months before operation. Groups of women without GnRHa treatment did not receive oral contraceptives or any other hormonal therapy within 6 months prior to surgery.
The phases of the menstrual cycle in women without hormonal therapy was determined by histological dating of eutopic endometria samples taken simultaneously with removal of myoma nodule. All biopsy specimens were collected in accordance with the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki and were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Research Ethical Committee of Saisaikei Nagasaki Hospital, Nagasaki and Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto (IRB No. 16005). All patients/samples were recruited/collected in Saiseikai Nagasaki Hospital, Nagasaki and research work was performed in Saiseikai Nagasaki Hospital, Nagasaki/Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto. All data analysis were performed by an independent investigator (HO) without any prior knowledge of the medical records. All patients in this study received medical treatment during the period of April 2014 and December 2016. All medical records were retrospectively assessed in Saiseikai Nagaskai Hospital during the period of April 2017 and August 2018. A written informed consent was obtained from all women.
Nine women with SMM and 6 women each with IMM and SSM underwent hysterectomy. Therefore, we could collect myometrial samples only from these women. Trans-cervical hysteroscopic resection (TCR), laparoscopic myomectomy (LM) or laparoscopy-assisted myomectomy (LAM) were performed in the remaining women. Therefore, instead of studying myometrial samples, we could study only pathologic lesions and endometria derived from these women. Biopsy specimens from the myoma nodule, autologous myometria or endometria were collected from all these women during operation. Biopsy specimens obtained after surgery were analyzed for the histological diagnosis of each fibroid. All collected biopsy specimens were prepared for formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue blocks for subsequent histopathological and immunohistochemical study and also for Massons trichrome staining with computer-captured image analysis. In case of multiple myoma, biopsy specimen was collected from the largest myoma and analyzed.
We performed immunohistochemical studies to investigate immunoreaction of target antigens in the serial section of biopsies using the following antibodies: ER (estrogen receptor-, 1:50, NCL-L-ER-6F11, mouse monoclonal, Novocastra Laboratories Ltd, Newcastle, UK); PR (progesterone receptor, 1:40, NCL-L-PGR-1A6, mouse monoclonal, Novocastra Laboratories Ltd, Newcastle, UK); anti-human von Willebrand factor (VWF) antibody (clone F8/86, code M0616; Dako, Denmark, 1:50 dilution), a mouse monoclonal antibody, to investigate immunoreaction to HUVECs. GnRHR (AT2.G7:sc-57176, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. CA), a mouse monoclonal antibody against both type I and type II receptor (1:25 dilution), was used to immunolocalize GnRHR expression in HUVECs. Non-immune mouse immunoglobulin (Ig) G1 antibody (1:50 dilution, Dako, Denmark) was used as a negative control.
The details of immunohistochemical staining procedures are described elsewhere. Briefly, five-micrometer thick paraffin-embedded tissues were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated in phosphate-buffered saline. After immersion in 0.3% H202/methanol to block endogenous peroxidase activity, sections were pre-incubated with 10% normal goat serum to prevent nonspecific binding and then incubated overnight at 4°C with respective antibody. The slides were subsequently incubated with biotinylated second antibody for 10 minutes, followed by incubation with avidin-peroxidase for 10 minutes and visualized with diaminobenzidine. Finally, the tissue sections were counterstained with Mayers hematoxylene, dehydrated with serial alcohols, cleared in xylene, and mounted. We had at least three slides per biopsy for immunohistochemical analysis. The expressions of ER/PR/VWF/GnRHR in fibroid tissue/myometria and in HUVECs were examined. The immunoreaction of ER/PR was expressed as number of ER/PR immunostained cells per high power field (HPF) (x200) and as a mean of five different fields.
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were isolated in primary culture and were obtained from female infant umbilical cords of women who underwent normal delivery without complications. A sterile technique was utilized in all manipulations of the cord. HUVECs were separated by collagenase digestion (10mL of 0.2% collagenase) of the interior of the umbilical vein. The separated endothelial cells were collected in 50mL conical centrifuge tube containing 10mL of DMEM medium with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). The cells were sedimented at 250g for 10min, washed twice with 10mL of DMEM + 10% FBS and finally yields a range of 0.51.5x106 cells. An aliquot of 0.5x104 cells was used for our experiments. The detail procedure of HUVECs isolation and preparation is mentioned in a previous report. HUVECs were cultured at 37°C under 5% CO2 in 75cm2 tissue culture flasks until the cells reached pre-confluence. Cell purity was confirmed by the appearance of typical cobblestone morphology and reaction to VWF antigen. The cells were re-plated onto 6- or 96-well plates until cells reached pre-confluence. The medium was changed to phenol red depleting DMEM containing 5% charcoal-treated FBS, penicillin and streptomycin, and the cells were pre-cultured for 12h. The cells were then incubated for 24h with medium without and with different doses of GnRHa (10-9M to 10-5M) (Leuplin: leuprolide acetate, Takeda, Tokyo, Japan). Leuprolide acetate (LA) was dissolved in ethanol to a final concentration of 0.1% per well. We confirmed the validity of these doses of LA in our previous study using EECs/ESCs and SMCs isolated from endometria and myometria of women with uterine myoma.
5-Bromo-2-deoxyuridine (BrdU) labeling and detection kit measures cell proliferation by quantitating BrdU incorporated into the newly synthesized DNA of replicating cells. The incorporated BrdU can be detected by a quantitative cellular enzyme immunoassay (Biotrak, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech Ltd., UK) using monoclonal antibodies directed against BrdU. It offers a non-radioactive alternative to the [3H]-thymidine-based cell proliferation and carries equal sensitivity and specificity. We examined the proliferation of HUVECs in response to variable doses (10-9M to 10-5M) of GnRH agonist. The detail procedure of BrdU incorporation assay was described previously. The results are expressed as percentage of control (GnRHa, 0M).
In order to determine the presence of fibrosis in the biopsy specimens derived from women with SMM, IMM, SSM, and surrounding myometrium, we performed Massons trichrome (MT) staining with aniline blue. All reagents were purchased from the Muto Chemical Co. Tokyo, Japan and staining procedures were followed according to the instruction of the manual as supplied by the Muto Chemical Co. Fibrosis in the respective biopsy samples was identified by dense or filamentous (fiber-like) blue staining (aniline blue) instead of green staining (methyl green) as described previously. Distribution of staining in the biopsy samples derived from respective myoma nodule and myometrum was analyzed. A minimum of five different fields in each MT-stained slide were examined by an independent observer (HO).
The details of computer- captured image analysis of MT-stained fibrosis from each sample is described elsewhere. Briefly, for computer-based image analysis, Fiji software was used (ImageJ 2.0.0-rc-61/1.5n, http://fiji.sc). First of all, background correction was done to reduce any color/luminance variations in image. Tissue area (region of interest, ROI) from each stained section was extracted based on luminance information by auto thresholding technique. Automatically calculated threshold was utilized for overcoming non-uniform staining conditions. Dense or filamentous blue-stained area was extracted based on color information. Finally, amount of fibrosis in each tissue specimen was quantified by the following formula: Fibrosis (%) = actual fibrosis area x 100 / ROI area.
All results are expressed as mean  SD or mean  SEM, median and inter-quartile range (IQR). The clinical characteristics of the subjects were compared with one-way analysis of variance. The differences in the ER/PR expression and fibrosis in respective biopsy samples between groups and among groups were analyzed by the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U-test and Kruskal-Wallis test, respectively. This is an observational study and not a randomized clinical trial. Our main purpose was to examine the effect of GnRHa on the expression profiles of ER/PR/fibrosis in women with uterine myomas comparing to GnRHa-untreated women. Therefore, we did not perform sample size calculation based on pre-specified power in this study. Instead we performed post-hoc power calculation regarding the estimated effect size as the true effect size for Mann-Whitney test in three groups of fibroids. The distribution of ER/PR/fibrosis according to groups was expressed using the box and whisker plots with the medians and IQR. A value of p<0.05 was considered statistically significant. Data analysis was conducted using SAS software version 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc. Cary, NC, USA).