The research protocol was approved by the Kaunas Regional Biomedical Research Ethics Committee of the Lithuanian University of Health Sciences with permission no. BE-2-13. The research study was registered in the US National Institutes of Health trial registry ClinicalTrials.gov with identifier NCT03388359.
The study group consisted of 13 allergic asthma (AA) patients, 11 severe non-allergic eosinophilic asthma (SNEA) patients, and 14 healthy subjects (HS) aged between 18 and 80 years. SNEA and AA patients were recruited from the Department of Pulmonology at the Hospital of Lithuanian University of Health Sciences Kauno klinikos. All study participants gave written informed consent, and in the recruitment stage, all subjects were screened: they underwent clinical examination, spirometry, methacholine challenge test, skin prick test, and complete blood count analysis.
The applied inclusion and exclusion criteria for all groups are presented in Table 1.
The inclusion and exclusion criteria were checked at the screening visit, and the study subjects signed informed consent. Then, spirometry was performed on all study groups. For AA and HS study groups, the methacholine challenge test and skin prick test was performed. In addition, during the baseline visit, the blood samples were collected, and bronchial allergen challenge with D. pteronyssinus was performed for AA and HS study groups. Twenty-four hours after the bronchial allergen challenge, the second study visit was scheduled for AA patients and HS, and blood samples were re-taken. For SNEA patients, only one visit was scheduled during which the blood samples were collected.
The eosinophils were isolated from subjects peripheral blood samples using high-density centrifugation and magnetic separation. We used subjects eosinophils and evaluated migration of ASMC and PF using a wound-healing assay, and measured contractility of ASMC and PF using collagen gel assay and gene expression of the contractility markers and ECM proteins in both cell lines.
A flow chart of the study design and experimental workflow is presented in Figure 1. The detailed experimental plan is provided in Figure 2.
The lung function of study subjects was evaluated according to baseline forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), forced vital capacity (FVC), and FEV1/FVC ratio using a Ganshorn spirometer (Ganshorn Medizin Electronic, Niederlauer, Germany). Baseline FEV1, FVC, and FEV1/FVC ratios were recorded as the highest result of three reproducible measurements compared to the predicted values matched for body height, weight, age, and sex using standardized methodology. Each of the values was repeatedly measured at least three times that met standards, but no more than eight times, and the highest value of FEV1 was taken for analysis.
AA and HS study group subjects underwent measurement of airway responsiveness to methacholine. For airway responsiveness evaluation, the inhaled methacholine test was performed using a ProvoX pressure dosimeter (Ganshorn Medizin Electronic). Aerosolized methacholine was inhaled at 2 min intervals, with a starting dose of 0.0101 mg. Then, the dose was increased by steps up to 0.121, 0.511, and 1.31 mg cumulative dose until the total cumulative dose was achieved or received the 20% decrease in FEV1 from the baseline. The provocative methacholine dose causing a ¥20% fall in FEV1 (PD20M) was calculated using the logarithmic dose-response curve by linear interpolation of the two adjacent data points.
The skin prick test was conducted using standardized allergen extracts from (Stallergenes S.A., Antony, France) for the following allergens: D. pteronyssinus, D. farinae, birch pollen, and five mixed grass pollens. The histamine hydrochloride (10 mg/mL) was used as a positive control, and the negative control was diluent (saline). The skin prick test was evaluated after 15 min of application. The test results were considered positive if the wheel diameter was at least 3 mm. Only AA patients sensitized to D. pteronyssinus were included in the study.
All study subjects from AA and HS groups underwent bronchial allergen challenge with D. pteronyssinus allergen (Stallergenes S.A.). The broncho-constricting effect of nebulized saline was first assessed. The aerosolized allergen was inhaled at 10 min intervals starting with 0.1 histamine equivalent prick (HEP)/mL allergen concentration, increasing it sequentially to 1.0, 10.0, 20.0, 40.0, 60.0 HEP/mL or until a 20% decrease in FEV1 from the baseline was achieved. The allergens provocative dose was calculated from the log dose-response curve by the linear interpolation of two adjacent data points.
Peripheral blood from each study subject was collected in vacutainers with dipotassium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (K2EDTA) (BD Vacutainer, Becton Dickinson UK Ltd., Wokingham, UK) before and 24 h after bronchial allergen challenge from AA and HS, and at the baseline visit from SNEA patients. A UniCel DxH 800 Coulter Cellular Analysis System automated hematology analyzer (Beckman Coulter, Miami, FL, USA) was used for the complete blood count test. Whole eosinophils isolation from peripheral blood procedure is described in our previous publication.
Individual combined cell cultures of eosinophils and ASMC or PF were prepared for experiments. ASMC are immortalized by stable expression of human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT), as Gosens et al. described, and the commercial MRC-5 cell line (Sigma, Ronkonkoma, NY, USA) as PF were used. ASMC and PF were grown to 9095% confluence in medium supplemented with 10% FBS for 72 h. Then, cells were serum-deprived before experiments, ensuring that the cells were in the phase of growth arrest, thereby equalizing all cells into the same phase of the cell cycle and minimizing the possible influence of proliferation. Isolated eosinophils were used to make the combined cultures with ASMC or PF.
For collagen gel assay, the 1.25  104 eosinophil suspension was added to ASMC or PF that were grown in 24 well plates at each seeding at 1  105 cell confluency. For wound healing assay, ASMC and PF were grown in 6 well plates at each seeding at 2  105 ASMC or PF; after 72 h, the combined cultures were formed with isolated eosinophils by adding 5  104 of them to each well. For gene expression, the ASMC and PF were cultivated in dishes with approximately 2  105 cells, and combined cultures were made by adding 5  104 isolated viable eosinophils suspension in the medium of the ASMC or PF. Each experiment was normalized using the control ASMC and PF cell culture that was not incubated with eosinophils. An inverted microscope (CETI Inverso TC100, Medline Scientific, Oxford, UK) was used for cell growth observation and visualization.
Serum from each investigated study subject was collected into BD VacutainerTM SSTTM II Advance tubes (BD Vacutainer, Becton Dickinson UK Ltd.) and centrifugated at 2000 g for 10 min. According to the growth medium supplements, ASMC and PF collagen gel assay and wound healing assay experiments were divided into the following experiments on the study day: the first part of the experiments was made with serum-free medium using only ASMC or PF cells as control cells; the second part used serum-free individual combined cultures with ASMC or PF cells and eosinophils; the third part used individual ASMC or PF cells with subjects serum at a concentration of 2% v/v; and the fourth part used individual combined cultures of ASMC or PF cells and eosinophils supplemented with subjects serum at a concentration of 2% v/v (Figure 2AD). Experiments using serum were conducted to maintain further eosinophil activation after isolation processes and to verify if the eosinophils were isolated in their activated form.
Collagen gel assay was used to evaluate the eosinophil effect on ASMC- or PF-induced collagen gel contraction. We used the protocol of Ngo et al. to perform experiments. Cells were grown for 72 h, and then the growth medium was changed to serum-free before the experiment. A solution of rat tail collagen I (Gibco„¢, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was prepared using the manufacturers protocol. In a sterile tube, the dH2O, 1N NaOH, and 10 PBS were mixed with ASMC or PF cells in an S0 medium, and the collagen was slowly pipetted into the tube and mixed well. Then, the mix was poured into the 24 well plates. After the isolation of eosinophils, the S0 medium was added to the individual subjects serum in the wells. Twenty-four hours after the incubation with eosinophils, the gel was detached from the well sides and bottom with a pipette tip and measured after 1, 2, 3 h incubation; the gels diameter was measured using a ruler in mm (Figure 3). As the differences at these time points were not significantly different, the subsequent measurement was performed 24 h after gel detachment to measure the maximum contraction. The contractility was represented as a contraction of collagen gel disk in the percentage of control cells. All incubations were under standard culture conditions of 5% CO2 in air at 37 °C.
In cell-induced collagen gel contraction assay, the measurement of collagen gel with control cells was equated to 100% and represented as an increased contraction of collagen gel disk caused by eosinophils and/or serum effect using the following formula:
Migration of ASMC and PF cells was evaluated using wound healing assay according to Liang et al.. Additionally, the subjects serum experiments were performed by adding 20 uL of the subjects serum. To mimic cell migration during wound healing in vivo, the wounded monolayer was co-cultured with eosinophils and/or subjects serum, and images were captured immediately after creating the wound (at the 0 h time point) and after 24, 48, and 72 h of incubation. Each picture taken was analyzed using ImageJ software (NIH and LOCI, University of Wisconsin) and data were expressed as the percentage of wounded and cell-covered areas from control cells that were not incubated with eosinophils (Figure 4).
First, we evaluated five AA patients, five SNEA patients, and five HS eosinophils to assess the effect on cell migration intensity at each time point; the 72 h incubation time point was chosen because it was sufficient to show differences in cell migration. The migration data is represented as the increased cell-covered area as a percentage of control cells. Images of wound healing are presented in Figure S1.
The eosinophils were separated from ASMC and PF cells after 24 h of incubation for gene expression analysis. ASMC and PF cells were lysed using TRIzol„¢ Reagent (Invitrogen„¢, Life Technologies), and the total ribonucleic acid (RNA) was isolated using the miRNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturers instructions. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed using a PowerSYBRGreen RNA-to-CT„¢ 1-Step Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) in the 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System according to the manufacturers protocol. AA and SNEA eosinophils effects on gene expression in ASMC and PF cells were evaluated as folds over the HS eosinophil effect. Regarding the bronchial allergen effect, the gene expression changes were evaluated by folds from baseline (before allergen challenge) results. Primers used in gene expression analysis are shown in Table 2.
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 8 for Windows (Version 8.01, 2019; GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). The ShapiroWilk test was used to confirm the normality assumption of data distribution. Contractility and gene expression data were not distributed normally; while migration data were distributed normally. However, the non-parametric tests were used because of a small sample sizes. For multiple comparison analysis between eosinophil effect of the investigated groups on ASMC and PF contractility and migration, the Kruskal- Wallis test was used. If Kruskal-Wallis test was significant, the Mann-Whitney two-sided U test was used to emphasize the different effect of eosinophil on ASMC and PF contractility and migration. For the multiple comparison within the group, the Friedman test was performed. If Friedman test was significant, the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test was performed to define differences between eosinophil and/or serum effect on ASMC and PF contractility and migration data. Multiple comparison values are presented in the legends of Figures. Also, the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test was used for analysis between two dependent groups to compare the data of experiments before and after bronchial allergen challenge. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used for gene expression analysis against the control of ASMC or PF cells. Data are presented as the mean and standard error of the mean (SEM) or standard deviation (SD). A value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.