In the present study, we analyzed two independent patients cohorts: 69 patients from the DLCL04 study, a prospective randomized phase 3 clinical trial investigating the role of first-line autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT) consolidation after chemoimmunotherapy in CD20+DLBCL, and 66 patients from a real-life cohort treated with R-CHOP/CHOP-like regimens at S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna (Italy), from 2007 to 2012. Patients characteristics are summarized in Table 1.
The study flowchart is depicted in Fig. 1 and additional details are provided in supplement.
This study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the participating centers, in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Gene expression was measured on the NanoString nCounter Analysis System (NanoString Technologies, Seattle, WA, USA). The original T-GEP panel contains 22 genes: 15 genes used to assign COO subtype, 5 housekeeping genes (UBXN4, ISY1, R3HDM1, WDR55, TRIM56); and the additional genes of interest: MYC and BCL-2. The complete list of genes, target sequences, and detailed methods are available in supplement.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was centralized in Milan for the DLCL04 trial and in Bologna for the real-life control group. Primary antibody source and dilutions are shown in Table S1 and a detailed description of IHC and FISH methods is provided in supplement.
The cut-off values of 50% and 40% positive neoplastic cells were applied for BCL2 and MYC respectively, and 50% for H2AX and 8-OHdG.
Prexasertib was provided by the Eli Lilly company for in vitro studies, and was purchased from Selleckchem (Houston, Tx) for in vivo studies. AZD7762, MK-8776, Venetoclax and the MCL-1 inhibitor S63845 were purchased from Selleckchem (Houston, TX).
Detailed information on cell lines, 8-OHdG ELISA assay, Caspase 3/7 assay, cell cycle analyses, qPCR assays, proliferation assays (Cell Titer Glo, Promega), and western blot antibodies are provided in supplement. The Tet-OFF MYC P-4936 cell line, which carries a conditional, tetracycline-regulated MYC promoter, was provided by Dr. A. Younes lab (Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY). Inducible overexpression of BCL2 in the SUDHL5 (BCL2 negative) cell line was performed by using the Cellecta InDOXible Tet-Activated cDNA Lentiviral Expression System (custom Cellecta). Detailed methods for in vitro studies are provided in supplement.
High-throughput drug screening experiments were performed as previously described. Plates were imaged after incubation with Alamar Blue on the LEADseekerTM Multimodality Imaging System (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ). In order to evaluate synergy, we compared the observed activity to the expected activity of the combination at that dose level under Bliss independence model. HTS experiments and analyses were performed at the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York. Detailed information is available in supplement.
Experiments involving animals were approved by the Italian Ministry of Health and have been performed in accordance with the applicable Italian laws (D.L.vo 26/14 and following amendments), the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, the institutional guidelines of the European Institute of Oncology and the ARRIVE guidelines.
The luciferase-expressing patient-derived xenograft (PDX) line DFBL-69487-V3-mCLP was obtained from the Public Repository of Xenografts (www.proxe.org). Detailed information is available in supplement.
Survival data and correlations were analyzed retrospectively. For survival analysis, we used the Kaplan-Meier method to estimate overall survival (OS). The two-tailed Student t test and Wilcoxon Rank test were used to estimate statistical significance. Correlations and differences in patients characteristics were analyzed with the chi-square and Fishers exact test. The PRISM software was used for the statistical analyses (v7). Significance was set at P<0.05. Combination index analysis was performed using the Chou-Talalay method.
T-GEP statistical analyses were calculated with the R software (v3.5.0). A detailed description is provided in supplement.