A sub-study of a double-blinded trial where persons with T2D were randomized to liraglutide up to 1.8 mg on top of standard of care or placebo on top of standard of care once daily for 26 weeks. The main trial included 102 patients with the primary aim of evaluating liraglutides effect on arterial inflammation. The trial included patients with T2D above 50 years of age, with an HbA1c¥48 mmol/mol (6.5%) and eGFR¥30 mL/min/1.73 m2. Participants were on stable glucose- and cholesterol-lowering treatment for a minimum of 4 weeks prior to inclusion. Treatment with dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors or GLP-1 RAs were not allowed 90 days prior to screening. Description of the main trial including detailed in- and exclusion criteria has previously been published. The primary end-point of the trial was change in vascular uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and was unchanged. Based on pharmacokinetic profile studies, we expected that liraglutide dosing between 0.6 and 1.8 mg once daily would result in a serum concentration of liraglutide of approximately 540 nmol/L.
In the current study, we report the results of a sub-study where the expression of inflammatory cytokines was evaluated before and at end-of-treatment in 54 (53%) of the study participants. The number of included participants in this sub-study was conditioned by the feasibility of PBMC isolation from blood samples at time of scheduled visits in the main trial, and inclusion was random.
Local ethics committee (Committee E, Region H, Denmark, H-16044546) and the Danish Medicines Agency (2016110109) approved the trial. The trial was conducted in compliance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Trial registration: ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03449654) and EU Clinical Trials Register (2016-001523-31). All participants provided written informed consent.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were prepared from fresh blood samples collected in Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) tubes using SepMate„¢ PBMC Isolation Tubes and Lymphoprep„¢ according to the manufacturer´s protocol (Stemcell Technologies). Briefly, 8 ml of anticoagulated blood was mixed with 8 ml of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) which was then gently added to a SepMate„¢ tube containing 15 ml of Lymphoprep„¢. Following centrifugation for 10 min at 1200g at room temperature, the top layer containing the plasma and PBMCs was poured into a 50 ml tube. Following centrifugation for 5 min at 300g, the supernatant was discarded and the PBMC pellet was washed once with 5 ml PBS. After pelleting by centrifugation, the PBMCs were resuspended in 100 l PBS to which 500 l RNAlater (Qiagen) was added. The total volume of 600 l was divided equally into three Eppendorf tubes and stored at  80 °C until further analysis.
Human monocytic THP-1 cells were grown in RPMI1640 medium containing 4.5 g/L glucose and 10% fetal bovine serum. Cells were passaged twice weekly. Cells seeded in duplicates were differentiated into macrophages by exposure to 100 nM phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate for 3 days after which the cells were left untreated or exposed to 5 ng/mL lipopolysaccharide (LPS) for 3 h in the presence or absence of 2.5 nM recombinant GLP-1 (amino acids 736) (R&D Systems). GLP-1 (736) and liraglutide has been shown to have very similar in vitro effects. The dose of 2.5 nM was chosen based on previous studies showing that GLP-1 in the low nM range exerts maximum or near maximum receptor binding and/or cellular effects. After stimulation, cells were washed in ice-cold Hanks balanced salt solution (Gibco) before being lysed in RLT buffer (Qiagen).
RNA was extracted from PBMCs by the Maxwell 16 Tissue LEV Total RNA Purification Kit using a Maxwell„¢ 16 purification instrument according to the manufacturer´s protocol (Promega). RNA from THP-1 cells was extracted using miRNeasy mini kit spin columns (QIAGEN). cDNA was prepared using the iScript„¢ cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad). Gene expression was quantified by real-time PCR using TaqMan assays (Applied Biosystems) on a CFX384 C1000 Termal Cycler (Biorad). Gene expression was normalized to that of actin B (ACTB). The relative expression levels were calculated by the Ct method.
Power calculation was done for the main trial with a primary PET/CT endpoint, and not for the present sub-study. We aimed at including as many participants as possible from the main trial and ended up with 31 participants treated with liraglutide and 23 treated with placebo.
Normally distributed data are presented as mean (standard deviation (SD)). Diabetes duration, urinary albumin creatinine ratio and hsCRP were log2 transformed in all analyses and presented as median [Interquartile range (IQR)]. Categorical variables are presented as total numbers (percent). Differences in clinical characteristics at baseline were tested using un-paired t-test, Ï2 test, or Fishers exact test as appropriate. We applied paired t-test to compare baseline and end-of-treatment values within the liraglutide and placebo treated group. Unpaired t-test was used to compare the change from baseline to end-of-treatment between the liraglutide and placebo treated group. Distributions were checked for normality before using paired and un-paired t-tests. Statistical analyses were performed using SAS software (version 9.4; SAS Institute, NC) and two-sided p-values<0.05 were considered statistically significant.